New West Indian Guide / Nieuwe West-Indische Gids vol. 82 no. 3 & 4 (2008):185-209

 PETER HULME

GRAHAM GREENE AND CUBA: OUR MAN IN HAVANA?

Graham Greene’s novel Our Man in Havana was published on October 6, 
1958. Seven days later Greene arrived in Havana with Carol Reed to arrange 
for the filming of the script of the novel, on which they had both been work-
ing. Meanwhile, after his defeat of the summer offensive mounted by the 
Cuban dictator, Fulgencio Batista, in the mountains of eastern Cuba, just 
south of Bayamo, Fidel Castro had recently taken the military initiative: the 
day after Greene and Reed’s arrival on the island, Che Guevara reached Las 
Villas, moving westwards towards Havana. Six weeks later, on January 1, 
1959, after Batista had fled the island, Castro and his Cuban Revolution took 
power. In April 1959 Greene and Reed were back in Havana with a film crew 
to film Our Man in Havana. The film was released in January 1960. A note at 
the beginning of the film says that it is “set before the recent revolution.” In 
terms of timing, Our Man in Havana could therefore hardly be more closely 
associated with the triumph of the Cuban Revolution. But is that association 
merely accidental, or does it involve any deeper implications? On the fifti-
eth anniversary of novel, film, and Revolution, that seems a question worth 
investigating, not with a view to turning Our Man in Havana into a serious 
political novel, but rather to exploring the complexities of the genre of com-
edy thriller and to bringing back into view some of the local contexts which 
might be less visible now than they were when the novel was published and 
the film released.

At the time of his death in 1991 Graham Greene was probably the best-
known British novelist, one of the few who had managed to combine criti-
cal and popular success over a long career. In 1958 he was at the height of 
his powers. Early work had included novels such as Brighton Rock (1938) 
and The Power and the Glory (1940). After the war he had published The 
End of the Affair (1951) and The Quiet American (1955). After Our Man 
in Havana was to come The Comedians (1966) and The Honorary Consul 
(1973). Some of these novels had domestic settings and focused on personal 
relationships or matters of religion, but many were set abroad and engaged 

seriously with the politics of decolonization: The Quiet American is set in 
Vietnam, The Comedians deals with Haiti in the 1960s under the notori-
ously brutal regime of François Duvalier. Greene was a steadfast supporter 
of radical and anticolonial movements: through a personal friendship with 
Omar Torrijos, the president of Panama, he became closely involved in the 
return of the Panama Canal to Panama, a process begun in 1977 though not 
completed until 1999. He was also solidly – if not uncritically – supportive 
of the Cuban Revolution, as is seen in the two essays he wrote in 1963 and 
1966 for the archconservative British newspaper, The Daily Telegraph, and 
in his admiring 1966 portrait of Fidel Castro.1

At first glance, however, Our Man in Havana might not look as if it has 

much in the way of political implications. In generic terms it appears like a 
parody of a spy novel. The true popularity of spy fiction followed Our Man 
in Havana with the novels of John Le Carré and Len Deighton, and the films 
that were made from them, starting in the 1960s, though the one immediate 
candidate for parody in 1958 was Ian Fleming, whose deeply racist Dr No 
had been published in 1957 – set in the Caribbean and concerning attacks 
on U.S. missiles. Greene himself categorized Our Man in Havana as merely 
one of his “entertainments.” Asked once whether he wished he had written a 
book like The Quiet American “which would have carried more weight” than 
an “entertainment,” Greene replied: “Not in the least. I think that Our Man in 
Havana is a good comic novel. The object was not to talk about Cuba but to 
make fun of the Secret Service. Havana was merely the background, an acci-
dent – it had nothing to do with my sympathy for Fidel.”2 The film version of 
Our Man in Havana seems to go further in this direction by removing almost 
all the brief references in the novel to rebel activity and by highlighting the 
already rich comedic possibilities inherent in the idea of the British Secret 
Intelligence Service (MI6) through the acting talents of Alec Guinness, Noel 
Coward, and Ralph Richardson.

In a note at the beginning of the novel Greene goes out of his way to 

play down the local context. He calls the book a “fairy-story,” specifically 
denying that the characters of the Havana police chief Captain Segura, the 

1. See “Return to Cuba” (1963) and “Shadow and Sunlight in Cuba” (1966), both in 
Greene 1990:213-20 and 245-52; and “The Marxist Heretic” (1966) in Greene 1969:405-
13.
2. Allain (1983:59). Greene’s own judgment has generally been accepted by critics, 
although Judith Adamson notes that while “Greene says his novel is only a light-hearted 
comedy, ... it has a dark and philosophical background which lends it substance and con-
tains many of his recurring themes” (1990:141). It is also true that, writing in defense of 
Sidney Gilliat’s libretto for Malcolm Williamson’s opera of Our Man in Havana, Greene 
stated: “I admired the great skill with which the libretto had compressed the action and yet 
brought out every political point” (Letter to The Times, July 4, 1963, in Greene 1995:573). 
Cf. Williamson 1963.

British ambassador, and the chief of the Secret Service have any connection 
at all with living people, and removing the novel from its time of publica-
tion by saying that it is “set at some indeterminate date in the future.” Not 
that indeterminate, it turns out; which offers a first clue as to the novel’s 
political undercurrents. When the protagonist Jim Wormold is arrested in 
Santiago during his annual sales trip to eastern Cuba, he tells a policeman 
that he is forty-five years old, and he later tells his new assistant Beatrice 
that he was born on December 6, 1914. That means that the novel is set just a 
year after it was published, between December 6, 1959 and the December 5, 
1960. The dates themselves are not important, since Greene could not have 
known that the Revolution would triumph so soon after the publication of 
his novel – though the novel does have the current Cuban president’s regime 
“creaking dangerously towards its end” (Greene 1958:24). The point is that 
Greene undermines his own supposed indeterminacy. In addition, the fact 
that the three characters he names are definitely based on living people hints 
at Greene’s characteristically playful obliquity, just as it begins to suggest 
the rather specific political connotations of both novel and film. Overtaken 
by events, the film could hardly follow the novel in claiming that it was set 
at some indeterminate future date: that note at the beginning saying that it is 
“set before the recent revolution” would place it in the last three months of 
1958, in other words the last three months of the Batista dictatorship.

In Our Man in Havana, Jim Wormold is a Phastkleaners vacuum-cleaner 
salesman living in Havana with his beautiful seventeen-year-old daughter, 
Milly – whose real name, Seraphina, Greene may well have taken from the 
Cuban beauty in the Conrad/Ford novel, Romance.3 Wormold is recruited in 
rather slapdash fashion into the British Secret Service, the induction taking 
place in the room of his contact, Henry Hawthorne, in the Sevilla-Biltmore 
Hotel. Completely uninterested in politics or spying, Wormold spots the 
opportunity to make enough money to ease the financial problems largely 
caused by his indulgence towards his daughter. Fictitious agents, their names 
chosen at random from a list of Country Club members, are recruited and 
expenses claimed for them, and increasingly fantastic stories woven to pro-
vide a patina of plausibility.

Twenty years later, Greene explained the background to the writing of 

the book (Greene 1980:238-51). He himself had worked for the British 
Secret Service in Freetown in the 1940s. Returning to London he had been 
appointed to the subsection dealing with counter-espionage in the Iberian 
peninsula, where he had learned about agents in Portugal sending back to 
Germany completely fictitious reports which garnered them expenses and 

3. Greene was a great admirer of Ford and editor of the Bodley Head Ford Madox Ford. 
He called Romance “that underrated novel” (Greene 1969:163).

bonuses to add to their basic salary. Asked for a film script in 1946 Greene 
had written an outline for a story set in Estonia just before the beginning of 
the Second World War which made gentle fun of the Secret Service. The film 
was never made, and the idea changed course when Greene realized that 
Havana – which he had visited several times in the early 1950s – would be 
a much better setting, the absurdities of the cold war being more appropriate 
for a comedy than the dark European shadows of 1938.4

Most of the novel takes place on the edge of Old Havana, controlled by 

the malicious police chief, Captain Segura, who has his eye on Wormold’s 
daughter, Milly: most scenes are set in Wormold’s shop on Calle Lamparilla, 
in his apartment above the shop, or in local bars. However, every year 
Wormold would make a trip to the eastern province of Oriente, as far as 
Santiago, to visit the company’s retailers. On this occasion he reckons that he 
might as well let MI6 finance the trip and so cables his contact: “On pretext 
of visiting sub-agents for vacuums propose to investigate possibilities for 
recruitment port of Matanzas, industrial centre Santa Clara, naval headquar-
ters Cienfuegos and dissident centre Santiago, calculate expenses of journey 
fifty dollars a day” (Greene 1958:74). 

Wormold’s experiences on his eastern journey shock him into action, pre-

cipitating the book’s major plot development. “What was the good of playing 
a game with half a heart?” he says to himself: “At least let him give them 
something they would enjoy for their money” (Greene 1958:89). So he con-
cocts an elaborate report about big military installations under construction 
in the mountains of Oriente, too extensive to be aimed at small rebel bands. 
Stories of widespread forest clearance under cover of forest fires and of peas-
ants being impressed to carry loads of stone provide supporting context. To 
round things off, he is inspired by the name of Phastkleaners’ latest model, the 
Atomic Pile, to sketch its innards, claiming that one of his agents had made the 
drawings of strange machinery being transported into the forest near the mili-
tary H.Q. at Bayamo, on the other side of the Sierra Maestra from Santiago. 
In London nobody except Hawthorne, who alone knows that Wormold sells 
vacuum cleaners, doubts the report or the sketches. To help Wormold, who is 
by now their most valued agent in the Caribbean, the Secret Service sends him 
a secretary, Beatrice Severn, and a communications officer.

At this point, however, Wormold’s web begins to unravel. The “agents” he 

has invented start getting killed in mysterious circumstances and his old friend, 
Dr. Hasselbacher, also involved in the murky world of espionage, is gunned 

4. “One could hardly sympathise with the main character if he was to be involved with 
the Hitler war. I already knew Cuba and my sympathies were with the Fidelistas in the 
mountains” (Letter to Ian Thomson, August 18, 1988, in Greene 2007:403). When Our 
Man in Havana was published, MI5 rang up the head of MI6 (according to Greene) to 
suggest that he should be prosecuted under the Official Secrets Act: “The head of MI6 
laughed” (Letter to Marie-Françoise Allain, January 1, 1990, in Greene 2007:413).

down in one of the bars where they used to drink together. Hasselbacher had 
been blackmailed into spying on Wormold, then honorably changed his mind 
because of his friendship with Wormold, so the enemy agent Carter kills him. 
Captain Segura says: “Of course we shall say it was the rebels from Oriente. 
It will be useful in influencing foreign opinion. Perhaps it was the rebels” 
(Greene 1958:228). Then London discovers that the other side (it is again 
characteristic of Greene that he never makes clear who they are) wants to kill 
Wormold during a trade association meeting in Havana. Wormold is sum-
moned to Jamaica to hear the news from Hawthorne. The enemy agent, Carter, 
masquerading as a salesman for the rival firm, Nucleaners, attempts to poison 
Wormold but is foiled when Wormold recognizes the stutter he has heard on 
tape in Segura’s office and deliberately spills the poisoned whisky. Then, after 
getting Segura drunk in a game of draughts, Wormold takes Segura’s gun and 
kills Carter. Wormold’s deception is finally uncovered, but rather than admit 
that they were all taken in by his invented sketch, the Secret Service big wigs 
offer Wormold a job in London and recommend an OBE. Milly graciously 
allows her father and Beatrice to get married.

Greene had long been interested in film, having been The Spectator’s film 
critic during the 1930s. Like most novelists, he had not been very happy 
with other people’s film versions of his novels and so after the Second World 
War he had jumped at the opportunity to work closely with the director 
Carol Reed, first in developing for the screen his short story, The Fallen Idol 
(1948), then writing a screenplay which became The Third Man (1949), a 
dark political thriller starring Orson Welles, which had a huge impact in 1949 
and was voted in a British Film Institute poll at the end of the century as the 
greatest British film ever made. Our Man in Havana was Reed and Greene’s 
third and final film together.5

Greene and Reed spent the best part of three months together working 

on the script, though strictly speaking this was an adaptation since the novel 
had already been completed (Ginna 1959:31). It was Batista’s government 
that had given permission for Our Man in Havana to be filmed in Cuba but 
the new Revolutionary government confirmed the arrangement, ensuring an 
authentic atmosphere. Indeed, according to a contemporary Time article, the 
new Cuban Interior Ministry was hurt that Reed even thought he needed to 
ask for permission.6 Our Man in Havana was filmed using a Cuban subdi-
rector, Cuban stand-by technicians, and a lot of Cuban extras. It might be 
assumed that Reed would have had considerable control over the British 
casting – Guinness, Coward, Richardson – but perhaps less so over the U.S. 

5. Dir. Carol Reed, 1959. See Adamson 1984. A good analysis of the film is in Evans 
2005:105-17.
6. “His Men in Havana,” Time, April 27, 1959.

casting, necessary for the financing of the film (jointly made with Columbia 
Pictures). Reed and Greene had displayed considerable independence 
in making The Third Man, protected by their producer Alexander Korda, 
which ensured they kept complete control over the script despite David O. 
Selznick’s best efforts to change it, but Korda had died in 1956, probably 
leaving Reed rather more exposed. In fact, Columbia seems to have left the 
script of Our Man in Havana to Greene and Reed – indeed in places the 
screenplay incorporates actual pages from the novel pasted onto type sheets 
(Adamson 1984:94), but the actors were another matter and the “entertain-
ment” element of the film was certainly strengthened by the inclusion of 
the popular U.S. figures Burl Ives and Ernie Kovacs, as well as the Irish 
American actress, Maureen O’Hara, and the young starlet, Jo Morrow. Burl 
Ives had just starred in the film of Tennessee Williams’s Cat on a Hot Tin 
Roof and had won an Academy Award for his part in William Wyler’s The 
Big Country. He had also testified for Joseph McCarthy’s House Committee 
on Un-American Activities, naming several of his fellow singers and actors 
as possible Communists, which gives an interesting edge to his role in this 
film as Dr. Hasselbacher, Wormold’s friend, who first betrays him and then 
is killed for trying to warn him of the betrayal. Jo Morrow, nineteen when 
she played Milly, “just couldn’t act,” according to Greene, which seems fair 
comment.7 She was also far too old for the part and turns a spoiled adolescent 
into a flirtatious and manipulative young woman. Kovacs was best known 
as a TV comedian, which would inevitably color perception of his role as 
Havana’s police chief, though he surprised critics with the assurance of his 
performance.

Greene reports that Cuba’s Revolutionary government did not really 

approve of the novel (Greene 1980:249). For them, it minimized the brutal-
ity of Batista’s dictatorship, particularly in what they saw as the softening 
of the character of the infamous police captain, Esteban Ventura Novo, into 
the cynical but not absolutely unsympathetic Captain Segura. Ventura Novo 
(1913-2001) had been responsible for much of the torture and murder in 
Havana that marked Batista’s repression in the years 1956 to 1958. Greene 
tells the story of how Ventura was going to be left behind by Batista but 
forced his way onto the departing dictator’s plane at gunpoint. He eventually 
settled in Miami, as in the novel Segura suggests he himself would do if the 
regime fell – another indication of Greene’s prescience.8

7. Graham Greene in an interview with Judith Adamson, June 21, 1982, in Adamson 
1984:98.
8. Greene 1980:249-50. On Ventura Novo’s death the exiled Cuban journalist and histo-
. Greene 1980:249-50. On Ventura Novo’s death the exiled Cuban journalist and histo-
rian, Octavio R. Costa, opined that Ventura was an effective enforcer against civil upris-
ings: “He did his job, and he did it in a way that responded to the circumstances of that 
era,” Miami Herald, May 23, 2001.

In April 1959 a member of the Film Division of the Cuban Ministry of 

the Interior, Clara Martínez, was assigned to the production team to represent 
the interests of the new Cuban government.9 On their behalf she requested a 
number of changes in two main areas. She wanted the character of Captain 
Segura to become more villainous, in order to correspond more closely to 
his model, and in the various nightclub scenes she wanted the strippers to 
take off fewer clothes than Reed and Greene wanted them to take off, which 
was already considerably fewer than they would have taken off before the 
Revolution, which was all of them. (After the Revolution, the only prerevo-
lutionary cabaret left untouched was the Tropicana – where the characters 
go in the novel and the film for Milly’s seventeenth birthday party – which 
had a chorus line but no strippers.) So in one respect the new Revolutionary 
government wanted more realism, in another respect less realism.

Ironically, Greene’s own early visits to Havana had been for exactly those 

aspects of the city that motivated Revolutionary distaste: the brothels, the 
high living, the drugs, the gambling, and the obscene cabarets. After his first 
visit, in 1954, Greene wrote: “Havana has been a fascinating city, quite the 
most vicious I have ever been in.”10 Under Batista’s dictatorship the Mafia 
controlled Havana’s huge gambling industry.11 The Mafia’s role in Havana 
had originally been developed by Charlie “Lucky” Luciano (born Salvatore 
Lucania), who had been serving thirty to fifty in a U.S. penitentiary in 1943 
when he appealed for a reduction of sentence in return for services rendered 
to the nation. Luciano had cooperated with the U.S. authorities to catch 
German spies on the east coast dockyards, which he still controlled from 
prison. He may also have eased the path to the U.S. invasion of Sicily. One 
of his deputies in New York, Vito Genovese, one of the major drug traffick-
ers of his day, certainly ended up as official interpreter and advisor to the 
U.S. military governor in Naples. The U.S. army originally worked with the 
Mafia in Sicily because the Mafia hated Mussolini who had cracked down 
on their activities. But after the War, the Mafia turned out also to be impec-
cably anticommunist, so the relationship with the U.S. intelligence services 
continued.12 It was eventually a Mafia boss in Havana, Santo Trafficante, Jr., 
who was involved in a CIA plot to assassinate Fidel Castro in 1960.13

9. See “His Men in Havana,” Time, April 27, 1959; and Ginna 1959. According to “His 
Men in Havana,” the Cuban Interior Minister, Luís Orlando Rodríguez, had a copy of the 
script translated into Spanish and then suggested changes to Reed and Greene.
10.. Letter to Natasha and Peter Brook, September 6, 1954, in Greene 2007:211; and see 
Adamson 1984:93-94.
11.. See in general Enrique Cirules’s two books, 2004 and 2006; Lacey 1991, chapters 13 
and 14; Schwartz 1997, chapters 9 to 12; and English 2008.
12.. See Robb 1999:32-33.
13.. See “Santo Trafficante, Reputed Mafia Chief, Dies at 72,” New York Times, March 19, 
1987.

Luciano had been released in 1946 but he was not allowed to stay in the 

United States. Havana was as close as he could get, but the U.S. authorities 
lent on Batista to get him back to Italy, possibly with the connivance of his 
friend Meyer Lansky, who was the person who eventually lost most financially 
through the success of the Cuban Revolution. Lansky is a very interesting if still 
rather shadowy figure, the most important Mafia boss without an Italian back-
ground. He had had contacts in Havana since the 1920s, when Cuba became a 
conduit for bootlegging during Prohibition, and had spent the winter months of 
1939 and 1940 there; but he moved into the city in a serious way only in 1952 
when Batista called on his services to develop Havana into a major gambling 
center. Lansky appears in fictionalized form in a number of films and in Mayra 
Montero’s fine novel about this period, Son de almendra.14 

In late 1957 – at exactly the moment when Greene started to write Our 

Man in Havana – there was a major fight in the Mafia over the distribution 
of the massive profits emanating from Cuba. Since Lansky did not have to 
worry about government interference, with Batista being paid a handsome 
cut, he and his associates had free rein to establish a string of casinos which 
produced cast-iron profits. In early 1957 the U.S. family headed by Alberto 
Anastasia complained about the small size of their share of this sumptuous 
cake. With Anastasia’s truculence perceived as threatening, Lansky had him 
assassinated in classic style in a barber’s chair in midtown Manhattan.15 To 
deal with the resulting crisis, the families convoked an urgent peace confer-
ence on November 14, 1957 at Joseph Barbara’s house near Apalachin in 
New York state, attended by sixty Mafia bosses from all over the country. It 
was probably the biggest meeting of the Mafia ever to take place and it was a 
complete disaster because the FBI raided it – often regarded as their biggest 
ever victory against organized crime (Sondern 1959:3-17). And, of course, 
the meeting was pointless because the prize of Havana, over which they were 
squabbling, was about to be taken away from them all.

The Mafia-run Cuban leisure industry plays a significant part in Our 

Man in Havana. When in Havana Greene himself used to stay at the Sevilla-
Biltmore Hotel, close to the Presidential Palace, run by Amletto Battisti and 
famous for the easy availability of cocaine and female company. That is also 
where Hawthorne stays in the novel, although in the film he stays at the 
Capri, a new hotel owned by mobster Santo Trafficante, Jr., which opened in 
November 1957, featuring a luxurious casino overseen by Mafia asset and 

14.. Lansky has been played by Lee Strasberg (as Hyman Roth) in The Godfather Part II 
(dir. Francis Ford Coppola, 1974); Mark Rydell in Havana (dir. Sydney Pollack, 1990); 
Ben Kingsley in Bugsy (dir. Barry Levinson, 1991), Richard Dreyfuss in Lansky (dir. 
David Mamet, 1999); and Dustin Hoffman in The Lost City (dir. Andy Garcia, 2005). 
Mayra Montero, Son de almendra (2005), translated 2008.
15.. Anastasia’s murder was not officially solved, so its connection with Lansky and Havana 
remains speculative: English (2008:224-34) furnishes a strong case for the connection.

ex-film star, George Raft. All the film principals on Our Man in Havana 
also stayed at the Capri, and it is the Capri’s rooftop swimming pool which 
features in the film’s opening shots (Figure 1).16

Greene’s choice of Cuba as the setting for his novel was presumably influ-
enced by the island’s recent irruption onto the world stage. In December 
1956, eighty-two rebels had landed on Cuban’s southeastern coast. After a 
few days only around a quarter were left. These survivors slowly gained 
a foothold in the mountains of the Sierra Maestra and started to win some 
small military successes, but they were under severe pressure because a peas-
ant traitor was giving directions to Cuban fighter planes that were strafing 
the rebel camps. It was at this difficult moment that Fidel Castro decided to 
organize a visit from a foreign press correspondent, calculating that clear 
news of his survival in the mountains would put Batista on the back foot both 
in Cuba and internationally. The man chosen for the interview was Herbert 
Matthews, foreign editor for the New York Times.

Supposedly on holiday, Matthews and his wife drove undercover, with 

Cuban minders, from Havana into the foothills of the Sierra Maestra, and 
Matthews walked into the mountains to meet Castro. Castro gave the jour-
nalist the story of the landing, an analysis of the military situation, and an 
explanation of the ideals of the Revolution. Matthews and his wife then trav-

16.. Lansky started at the Montmartre Club, a place for high rollers, and in 1955 he got 
the contract to run the new casino at the Hotel Nacional; but his big project was the Hotel 
Riviera, which opened on December 10, 1957.

Figure 1. The opening scene, shot on the rooftop of Hotel Capri

eled on to Santiago, from where they flew back to Havana. After a brief visit 
to their old friend Ernest Hemingway, the couple returned to New York with 
Matthews’s notes hidden in his wife’s girdle. Confident that no one else had the 
story, the New York Times waited until the next Sunday, February 24, 1957, to 
print the first part of Matthews’s scoop, while running trailers during the week 
about revolution in Cuba to raise interest and expectation. When Matthews 
had returned from Cuba, one trailer said, “with a story that’s sure to startle the 
world” (quoted in DePalma 2006:98). Then on the Sunday, under the head-
line “Cuban Rebel Is Visited in Hideout,” and subhead “Castro Is Still Alive 
and Still Fighting in Mountains,” and alongside a large photograph of Castro 
holding a rifle with a telescopic sight, Matthews’s historic report opened like 
this: “Fidel Castro, the rebel leader of Cuba’s youth, is alive and fighting hard 
and successfully in the rugged, almost impenetrable fastnesses of the Sierra 
Maestra, at the southern tip of the island.”17 It was one of the biggest journalis-
tic scoops of all time. The Cuban government responded by calling Matthews’s 
story a “chapter in a fantastic novel.” It noted that there was no photograph of 
Matthews with Castro; asserted that, whether Castro was dead or alive, he cer-
tainly had no supporting forces; and claimed that the interview could not have 
taken place because the Sierra Maestra was enclosed by a ring of steel. The 
following day the New York Times published a photograph of Matthews sitting 
next to Castro, both smoking cigars. The Cuban government declared it a fake, 
making Batista look even more foolish (Matthews 1961:45-50).

One aspect of Matthews’s scoop is particularly relevant to Our Man in 

Havana. The main reason that Castro’s survival had not been reported is that 
most of the international journalists and diplomats were in Havana, 600 miles 
west of the Sierra Maestra. To get the story, Matthews had to be prepared for a 
long journey east to the province of Oriente, which had always been the center 
of revolutionary activity in Cuba. When he started to work on his novel in 
November 1957, just nine months after Matthews’s journalistic scoop, Greene 
decided that he needed to find something out about the rest of the country and 
so he followed Matthews’s footsteps: “I set about curing a little of my igno-
rance. I made Cuban friends, I took a car and travelled with a driver around 
the country” (Greene 1980:241). He was unable to get to Santiago by car, but 
not for the mechanical reasons which give Wormold a similar problem in the 
novel: “There were military roadblocks all round the capital of Oriente and 
every foreigner arriving by private car was suspect.” So Greene flew in by 
plane: “An unofficial curfew began at nine p.m. dangerous to ignore, there 
were arbitrary arrests, and often when day broke a man’s body would be 
found hanging from a lamp-post” (Greene 1980:243). There were no tourists 
and a general atmosphere of suspicion pervaded the city. Between Matthews’s 
visit to Santiago in February and Greene’s in November, the city had indeed 

17. New York Times, February 24, 1957, 1 and 34.

been in turmoil. On July 30, the leader of the rebels in Oriente, Frank País, 
had been murdered on the street in a police ambush. By chance, the new U.S. 
ambassador, Earl E.T. Smith (a businessman and Republican Party fundraiser 
without diplomatic experience), arrived in Santiago two days later. Herbert 
Matthews had told Smith “that Havana was not Cuba and that the atmosphere 
in the rest of the country was very different, and I suggested that he travel 
around and see things for himself” (Matthews 1961:71). Smith arrived to find 
a large group of women demonstrating against Batista and being beaten up by 
the police. Asked for an immediate public comment Smith said “Any sort of 
excessive police action is abhorrent to me.” Opposition forces were heartened 
to hear a U.S. ambassador seeming to protest on their behalf while Batista was 
outraged and threatened to make Smith persona non grata. Smith himself was 
highly annoyed that he had been encouraged to go to Santiago where he was 
clearly out of his depth. He did not make the same mistake again and soon 
repaired his bridges with Batista.18 While Greene was there, three sisters, aged 
between eight and ten, were seized from their home in the middle of the night 
by soldiers to be used as hostages against their father, who had joined Castro 
in the Sierra. The following day a mass demonstration by children forced the 
release of the girls.

Just before leaving Havana for Santiago, Greene had been to a party where 

he met a fidelista courier who was going to be traveling on the same plane 
as him. She asked him to take sweaters and socks needed by the men in the 
mountains in his suitcase because it was easier for a foreigner to explain win-
ter clothes. In Santiago Greene experienced what he calls a comedy of errors 
as absurd as anything described in Our Man in Havana. He was accompanied 
to Santiago by the correspondent of Time magazine, hoping for a story. Greene 
thought he ought to warn the courier about the correspondent, and his host 
from the previous evening told him to await her phone call in his hotel, the 
Casa Granda in Plaza de Céspedes. Inevitably the Time correspondent showed 
up the next morning just as the phone call was expected, accompanied by a 
man claiming to be Castro’s public relations man in Santiago – though Greene 
thought him too old and too smartly dressed. Managing with some difficulty 
to get his visitors to leave, Greene took the call and was asked to go to a 
house in Calle San Francisco. Afraid even to consult the desk clerk, Greene 
took a taxi, did a tour of the sights, and then asked the taxi driver to take him 
to the old church of San Francisco, assuming that if such a church existed it 
would be in Calle San Francisco. Clearly all that work for the Secret Service 

18.. See Earl Smith’s own self-serving, defensive, and hysterically anti-Castro account 
(1991). Greene recalled this incident in Ways of Escape (1980:243-44), noting that Smith 
had been rebuked by John Foster Dulles: “In the eyes of the United States Government 
terror was not terror unless it came from the left.” Wayne Smith, a junior officer in the 
Embassy from 1957, saw Earl Smith and Gardner (his predecessor) as “entirely out of 
their depth” (1987:18).

had not gone to waste.19 Telling the taxi driver he wanted to pray and would 
then walk back to the hotel, Greene set off up Calle San Francisco only to be 
approached by a car carrying the Time correspondent and Mr. X, who was 
indeed who he claimed to be and had now been told about the rendezvous. All 
three arrived together at the house of assignation, where they met the courier 
and her mothe r, a priest, and a young couple who turned out to be Haydée 
Santamaría and her husband Armando Hart who had just made a dramatic 
escape from the law courts in Havana where he was being taken under mili-
tary escort for trial, and who was now in the process of having his hair dyed as 
part of a new disguise. Greene recalls that Santamaría had been taken by the 
police to see the blinded and castrated corpse of her former fiancé (Boris Luís 
Santa Coloma) after his torture and murder for taking part in the attack on the 
Moncada barracks in 1953. (Her brother Abel had been tortured and murdered 
at the same time.) Greene notes quietly: “I remembered that story when the 
wife of the Spanish Ambassador spoke to me of Batista’s social charm.”20

It quickly turned out that the reason the Cubans wanted to talk to Greene 

was to ask him to intercede with the British government, which was prepar-
ing to sell planes to Batista – which would obviously be used against the 
rebels. Greene subsequently got a friendly Labour MP, Hugh Delargy, to ask 
a question in the House of Commons, to which the Secretary of State for 
Foreign Affairs, Ian Harvey, replied that no arms had been sold to Batista 
– though, as it happened, negotiations were already taking place to do so.21 
Earlier, Cuba had been almost entirely dependent on the United States for 
arms, but the latter started to get queasy during 1957 since Batista was using 
U.S. B-26 aircraft and tanks to stamp out internal revolt, thereby associating 
the United States with a repressive government and violating the terms under 
which the arms were sold, which forbad their use for internal security. These 
considerations were not actually strong enough to prevent the continued sale 
of U.S. arms to Cuba, but the U.S. government did begin to defer the sale 
of arms as a lever to try to modify Batista’s behavior, particularly by getting 
him to commit to holding elections in June 1958. Batista’s response was to 
seek weapons from the United Kingdom and from Canada.22 (Our Man in 

19.. The CIA certainly kept an eye on Greene during the filming in Havana in April 1959 
(Sherry 2005:142-43), so they might well have been following him in 1957, unless they 
shared the British unwillingness to stray too far from Havana.
20.. Greene 1980:248; cf. Santamaría 1980 and Hart Dávalos 2004. Greene met Haydée 
Santamaria again when he returned to Cuba in 1966: see his letter to Catherine Walston, 
October 3, 1966, in Greene 2007:285-86.
21.. See Greene’s letter of October 23, 1958 to Delargy, asking him to raise some opposi-
tion to the sale of British planes to Batista, in Greene 2007:232-33; and Parliamentary 
Debates, Commons, 1958/59, vol. 584, 888, March 17, 1958. 
22.. This and the following paragraphs draw extensively on Phythian & Jardine 1999 and 
on Hull 2007.

Havana’s passing reference to U.S. attitudes comes when the U.S. consul 
speaks at the lunch where Wormold is nearly murdered: “He spoke of the 
spiritual links between the democracies— he seemed to number Cuba among 
the democracies” [p. 217]). 

In August 1958 – after the completion of Greene’s novel but before its 

publication – the United Kingdom agreed to sell Comet tanks and Sea Fury 
aircraft to Batista on the back of a matchless Foreign Office assessment that 
the “chances are now remote ... of Fidel Castro coming to power and our 
consequently finding ourselves in the embarrassing position of having sup-
plied Batista with arms.”23 Twelve of the seventeen aircraft ordered reached 
Cuba by December 1958, just in time to be used against the guerrillas in the 
last days before Batista’s departure. A parliamentary row over the export of 
the Comet tanks was caused by a question asked on November 19, 1958 by 
Greene’s friend, Hugh Delargy, this time of Foreign Secretary Selwyn Lloyd. 
Would it not be better not to supply arms to either side, Delargy enquired, 
given that a civil war is raging? Lloyd refused to recognize that there was civil 
war: “There is a good deal of disagreement as to what is taking place in Cuba 
today,” he said. But he did agree that the situation had changed since the deal 
was made and said he would inform the House of Commons before any fur-
ther weapons were sent.24 Lloyd’s capitulation on this point was deplored by 
the Cuban ambassador in London, who pointed out that Cuba had supported 
Britain in the United Nations over Suez (the only Latin American country to do 
so), and so expected support in return against its own rebels (Hull 2007:601). 
Any embarrassment was short-lived because of Batista’s fall from power, and 
the potential future embarrassment of previous U.K. support for Batista when 
faced by his replacement was avoided by the new Cuban government’s grati-
tude for having come into possession of recently delivered heavy arms with 
which to defend the Revolution. So, when Castro’s army finally rolled into 
Havana on January 8, 1959, it did so atop an array of military hardware which 
included fifteen British tanks. Greene’s immediate response was to write a 
letter to The Times which began: “The welcome success of Dr. Fidel Castro in 
overthrowing the dictatorship of Batista reminds us again of the extraordinary 
ignorance of Cuban affairs shown by the British Government” and goes on to 
ask: “What kind of information ... was the Foreign Office receiving from its 
representatives in Cuba?”25

In June 1959 the new Cuban government upped the ante by saying that 

they would like to swap their Sea Furies (five of them still undelivered) for 
more powerful Hawker Hunter jets. Selwyn Lloyd was rather inclined to 

23.. Memorandum from H.A.A. Hankey, August 6, 1958 (PRO: FO371/132175/ak1192/6), 
quoted in Phythian & Jardine 1999:35.
24. Parliamentary Debates, Commons, 1958/59, vol. 595, 1133-34, November 19, 1958.
25. The Times, January 3, 1959, in Greene 1989:74-75. That comment inevitably reflects on 
the failings of Sir Stanley Fordham, British ambassador to Cuba between 1956 and 1960.

agree, but the U.S. government in turn increased the pressure, notably in 
a series of memoranda from the Secretary of State, Christian Herter, who 
suggested that Cuba’s new government might use the planes “for purposes 
hostile to the principles for which the Free World stands,” conceivably post-
poning “the inevitable day when Castro will have to face judgement.”26

Lloyd’s reply was skeptical about Herter’s assessment, but of course Lloyd 

did not know – because he was not told – that Herter could be upbeat about 
Castro’s imminent encounter with judgment because the CIA was already plot-
ting with Cuban dissidents in Florida to engineer his downfall. The real reason 
that the United States did not want Great Britain to sell arms to Cuba was that 
it knew that any new weapons would be used to resist the U.S.-backed invasion 
which was already being planned, and which would soon get approval from 
the outgoing U.S. president, Dwight D. Eisenhower. So the British government 
decided against selling more planes to Cuba, or replacing the Sea Furies with 
Hunters. The Cabinet was told that the decision had been taken because of 
U.S. pressure: “although our trade interests in Cuba might suffer if we refused 
the [Cuban] request, a failure to support the U.S. where their strategic inter-
ests were involved might have even more harmful effects on our economy.” 
However, it would be desirable to publically relate the decision to the continu-
ation of tension in the Caribbean rather than to U.S. pressure.27

As a result of this British decision, Cuba had a very small airforce in April 

1961 at the time of the Bay of Pigs invasion: just 13 planes, five of which 
were put out of commission in a bombing raid two days before the inva-
sion. However the remaining British Sea Furies proved extremely effective, 
disabling the freighter Houston and preventing it landing equipment, and 
hitting the CIA command vessel, the Barbara J., forcing it to withdraw. As a 
result, a British Sea Fury has pride of place on the forecourt of the Museo de 
la Revolución in Havana.

Though not fully aware of all these machinations in late 1958 and early 

1959, Greene surmised enough to conclude that the Foreign Service and 
the Secret Service amply merited the gentle ridicule of Our Man in Havana 
(Greene 1980:249). As Greene noted, any tourist to Santiago (as he had been 
in November 1957) could have told Selwyn Lloyd that the conflict in Cuba 
did amount to a civil war – with the unspoken implication that the British 
ambassador and any members of the Secret Service in Cuba never bothered 
to leave Havana to find out what was happening.

The only two additions to the film of Our Man in Havana with a political 
dimension come in the Wonder Bar scenes where Wormold and Hasselbacher 

26.. Washington telegram no. 2335 to Foreign Office, Herter to Selwyn Lloyd, November 
4, 1959 (PRO: FO 371/139474/AK1223/88), quoted in Phythian & Jardine 1999:50.
27.. November 26, 1959 (PRO: CAB 128/36 C60 (59) 4), quoted in Pythian & Jardine 
1999:54.

meet to drink and chat. On one occasion the headline in the newspaper on 
the bar reads: “Latin America in Need of Dollars Not Arms.” Then, when 
Wormold is explaining to Hasselbacher why he wants to take Milly away 
from Cuba, he says “Civil war, men like Segura.” That reference to “civil 
war” is Greene’s very pointed comment at the ignorance of the British gov-
ernment and its intelligence services about events in Cuba as revealed by the 
Foreign Secretary in that short period between the publication of novel and 
the making of the film.

The most significant difference between novel and film is the absence 

from the film of the episode with greatest resonance for the Cuban politi-
cal situation as Greene experienced it in late 1957: Wormold’s trip east to 
Santiago.28 Wormold always travels in his old Hillman, but when it breaks 
down in Santa Clara he decides to go to Santiago by coach: “Perhaps in any 
case it was quicker and safer that way, for in the Oriente province, where the 
usual rebels held the mountains and Government troops the roads and cities, 
blocks were frequent and buses less liable to delay than private cars” (Greene 
1958:77). The phrase “the usual rebels” perhaps echoes Casablanca’s “the 
usual suspects” and is entirely characteristic of Greene’s careful prevarica-
tion. It could certainly be Wormold’s own phrase, the slightly cynical expres-
sion of an English expatriate in a Latin American country, always hearing 
about rebels in the mountains. But just as the original phrase was used by 
Captain Renault to camouflage Rick’s involvement in the killing of Nazi 
officer Major Strasser, so “the usual rebels” might equally well obscure 
Greene’s knowledge that the rebels were by no means “usual.” Any such 
echo would, in any case, suggest an equivalence between the French resis-
tance and the struggle against Batista, something that the new Revolutionary 
government might have had in mind when allowing the film of the novel to 
be made in Havana. In a delicious twist, the chief of the Service Service in 
London has a hunch that these rebels do not even exist, that they are just an 
excuse fabricated by the Cuban government to shut down a censorship over 
the area, a neat joke of Greene’s given his awareness of Batista’s attempts to 
suggest that the rebels did not in fact exist.

The tone of the novel darkens considerably during this Oriente epi-

sode. The evening hours in Santiago are described as “the empty dangerous 
hours of the unofficial curfew” (Greene 1958:77). The shops are closed, the 
streets almost deserted, the greenery hangs dark and heavy. Everyone treats 
Wormold with suspicion. On his way back from an inconsequential meeting 
with his retailer (“Trade was bad” [Greene 1958:78]), he is stopped by two 
olicemen who want to know what he is doing out so late. It was ten o’clock. 
There is no curfew, as Wormold unwisely points out:

28.. Quentin Falk suggests that the film of Our Man in Havana follows the book faithfully 
with “merely a handful of incidental scenes omitted” (Falk 2000:105), but this Santiago 
sequence is far from incidental.

Suddenly, without warning, one of the policemen slapped his face. He felt 
shock rather than anger. He belonged to the law-abiding class; the police 
were his natural protectors. He put his hand to his cheek and said: “What 
in God’s name do you think ...?” The other policeman with a blow in the 
back sent him stumbling along the pavement. His hat fell off into the filth 
of the gutter. He said, “Give me my hat,” and felt himself pushed again. 
He began to say something about the British Consul and they swung him 
sideways across the road and sent him reeling. (Greene 1958:79)

This sudden violence changes the tone of the novel dramatically. Not for the 
first time – and just as it had done for Greene himself – a trip from Havana to 
Santiago has provided an education in how matters really stand in Cuba. The 
rumors of repression and brutality no longer seem quite so much in the back-
ground. Since Wormold focalizes the novel, this almost random violence 
visited on him in Santiago at the hands of the police is quite startling. It also 
compromises Wormold morally. When he is threatened with further violence 
he invokes the name of Captain Segura: “He is a friend of my daughter ... 
I don’t think Captain Segura would be pleased” (Greene 1958:82), which 
serves to frighten the policemen into releasing him.

Casablanca29 set a template for postwar political thrillers which it was 

almost impossible to escape, and the film provides an interesting lens through 
which to read Our Man in Havana. There are some obvious and fairly gen-
eral similarities between the two: a Third-World setting, a moment of politi-
cal transition, an individualistic hero caught up in a larger war, a woman 
who flies in and disrupts the hero’s life. But most significant is the similarity 
between Segura and Renault, the two police officers whose ambiguously 
shifting loyalties lie at the center of the respective works. Both are womaniz-
ers, though – unlike Renault – Segura operates entirely properly and Greene 
is careful not to suggest that Milly is in any imminent sexual danger even 
though she is a wholly innocent sixteen-year-old when the novel opens, only 
just within the age of consent. Segura is in fact rather touchingly committed 
to convincing Wormold that he would make a suitable husband for Milly. 
He is obsessed by doing things correctly, and his lack of realization as to 
how little chance of success he has increases his vulnerability, and there-
fore makes him more sympathetic to readers than he would otherwise be. 
Renault – though superficially a more engaging character with his ready wit 
and devil-may-care attitude – is in fact sexually voracious, selling exit visas 
to desperate women in exchange for sex, an aspect of Casablanca which 
only narrowly got past the censors and which the film rather glosses over in 
its rush to the “start of a beautiful friendship” ending, with its homoerotic 
undertones, once Ilsa Lund has, to her evident dismay, been ushered on to the 
plane to spend the rest of her life with Victor Laszlo.30 

29. Dir. Michael Curtiz, 1942.
30. The Production Code Administration objected to the suggestion that Renault seduced 
women in exchange for exit visas, see Harmetz 1993:162-64.

Even more pertinently, both Renault and Segura cover up the murders com-

mitted by the works’ respective protagonists. Both culminating scenes take 
place in airports, where Renault protects Rick from the consequences of him 
killing Strasser, while Segura, taking his failure to marry Milly with eminently 
good grace, lets Wormold leave, while giving him the bullet that killed Carter 
to show that he knows that Wormold is getting away with murder (Figure 2).

Greene offers no physical description of Wormold, but conveys an impression 
of a diffident middle-aged man who is not exactly physically active: “anxious 
and criss-crossed, and fortyish” (Greene 1958:4). Alec Guinness, forty-five 
– exactly Wormold’s age – when he played the part in the film, provides a 
handy enough image. Wormold is a difficult character to read – as Greene no 
doubt intended. In one sense he is the hero of a comedy and therefore his role 
is preordained: he will survive all difficulties and get the girl at the end. The 
problem comes in reconciling the diffidence necessary to get him into trouble 
in the first place – the badly paid job in a Caribbean outpost, the broken mar-
riage, the daughter out of control – with the activity necessary to get him out 
of the trouble he has got himself into – killing the enemy agent who has been 
sent to murder him. In some ways Greene seems to have looked inwards for 
this reconciliation: Wormold is often read as something close to a self-portrait 
and his creation of an imaginary spy network and missile system is presented 
as the work of a would-be novelist of some considerable imagination. At one 
point Wormold tells Milly he is becoming “an imaginative writer.” His char-
acters – the invented agents – “grew in the dark without his knowledge.” “You 
talk like a novelist,” Beatrice says to him (Greene 1958:91, 127, 133). Norman 
Sherry (2005:133) reckons that Wormold’s inventiveness makes him “closer to 

Figure 2. Segura with Wormold and Milly at the airport

Greene than any other created character in the author’s repertoire.” Wormold 
is even given a hint of Greene’s own difficult schooldays when Greene was, 
as he recalled, “tortured” by a boy called, inevitably, Carter.31 Even more 
intriguingl y, the novel clearly suggests that Wormold has the kind of detailed 
knowledge of Havana nightlife that Greene himself possessed. When Milly 
suggests going to the Shanghai nightclub for her birthday, Wormold is startled 
that she has even heard of it; but he knows it well – it is where, as he later notes, 
three pornographic films were shown nightly between nude dances.32 When 

31.. “For there was a boy at my school called Carter who perfected during my fourteenth 
and fifteenth years a system of mental torture based on my difficult situation. Carter 
had an adult imagination – he could conceive the conflict of loyalties, loyalties to my 
age-group, loyalty to my father and brother. The sneering nicknames were inserted like 
splinters under the nails. I think in time I might have coped with Carter – there was an 
element of reluctant admiration, I believe, on both sides. I admired his ruthlessness, and 
in an odd way he admired what he wounded in me. Between the torturer and the tortured 
arises a kind of relationship. So long as the torture continues the torturer has failed, and 
he recognizes an equality in his victim” (Greene 1971:79-80).
32.. Before the Revolution the Shanghai was infamous for its live sex shows featuring 
Superman and numerous female companions. In the novel Superman is actually referred 

Figure 3. Wormold and Beatrice in the Shanghai nightclub

Wormold and Beatrice have to warn Teresa, one of his supposed agents work-
ing at the Shanghai, Wormold knows that the second performance will not yet 
be over (Figure 3). And to Carter’s question about where Wormold plans to 
take him, Wormold replies “Any one of a dozen whore-houses. They are all the 
same ... About a dozen girls to choose from. They’ll do an exhibition for you” 
(Greene 1958:246). Wormold clearly knows his way round the seamy side of 
Havana. The importance of all this only becomes apparent when Wormold is 
preparing to kill Carter. Carter has murdered Hasselbacher and tried to kill 
Wormold and will no doubt try again. So, strictly speaking, Wormold needs no 
further motivation. But it is apparent that his author feels the need for a differ-
ent kind of motivation for Carter’s killing: Carter has to be humiliated before 
he is killed.

By this point in both novel and film, Wormold has gained considerably in 
status. His wife had left him, he remembers, because he just stands there, as 
she had put it. But his pseudo-spying activities have given him a new lease 
of life. He has attracted Beatrice, played in the film by Maureen O’Hara, then 
nearly 40 (Beatrice is 31 in the novel), but still a very beautiful woman who 
had recently played opposite John Wayne in Rio Grande and The Quiet Man, 

to as performing at the San Francisco brothel, but Greene had seen him at the Shanghai, 
just as he had seen a lesbian show at the Blue Moon, where Wormold takes Carter in the 
film (Greene 1980:241). Apparently Greene spent quite some time during the filming of 
Our Man in Havana trying to track down Superman, who had gone underground after the 
Revolution. For a contemporary account of the Shanghai, see Roberts 1953:226-29.

Figure 4. Carter failing to undress the stripper

lending Wormold by association an image of masculinity that his demeanor 
hardly suggests. He has outdrunk Captain Segura and taken his gun, a sym-
bolic unmanning which requires little interpretation. Just in case we fail to 
get the point, in the first nightclub they stop at Carter is approached by a 
stripper to unhook her black lace corsets. (From the front in the film, and 
they are a lighter color; Figure 4). Carter fumbles and blushes, clearly unfa-
miliar with the finer points of women’s underwear, and Wormold offers to 
help him. Then, when they approach a brothel, Carter gets even more flus-
tered and lurches into a pathetic confession that he tries to want women but 
“It doesn’t work, Wormold. I can’t do what they want” (Greene 1958:250). 
So throughout all these scenes Wormold becomes more and more like his 
author, with a kind of worldly assurance, and Carter becomes more and more 
pathetic. Carter tries to argue with Wormold that they are both foot soldiers 
in some great political struggle and should therefore have some fellow feel-
ing, but Greene has ensured a deep character division as embodied in dif-
ferential sexual adequacy, as if to drain any possible empathy in his readers 
towards Carter. But then, characteristically, Greene pulls back from the divi-
sion he has just created because Carter’s humiliating confession makes it less 
easy for Wormold to kill him: “I have to do it, Wormold thought, before he 
confesses any more to me. With every second the man was becoming human, 
a creature like oneself whom one might pity or console, not kill” (Greene 
1958:250). Nonetheless, kill him he does, Greene protecting his hero by hav-
ing him shoot back as Carter tries to kill him (Figure 5).

The figure of Segura is certainly the key to the novel’s relationship with 
Cuban realities. Greene did not keep up the pretence that Segura was not 
based on a real person: in Ways of Escape he openly discussed Ventura Novo, 

Figure 5. Wormold shooting Carter

while noting that he had “changed a savage Captain Ventura into a cynical 
Captain Segura.”33 Greene was clearly not interested in simply writing a novel 
about Batista’s Cuba. But the connections between Ventura Novo and Segura 
are certainly there, most significantly perhaps in the references to torture. 
Whenever Greene wrote about pre-Revolutionary Cuba, he stressed its reli-
ance on torture. In the letter he wrote to The Times immediately after Castro’s 
overthrow of Batista, berating the British government for the intelligence fail-
ures which had led to it supplying arms to Batista, Greene highlighted “the 
mutilations and torture practised by leading police officers.”34 Three years 
later, in a further letter to The Times, he broadened the claim, recalling that 
“President Batista’s police state, addicted like most police states to the prac-
tice of torture, was supported not only by the American Government of the 
time, not only by the more influential racketeers of Las Vegas, who controlled 
the gambling concessions and brothels of Havana, but also, in a blinkered way 
by the present British Government” (Greene 1989:109). 

Segura’s reputation as a torturer therefore provides one unbreakable con-

nection to Ventura Novo: Hasselbacher notes that Segura “specialises in tor-
ture and mutilation” (Greene 1958:39) and it is well known that he carries a 
cigarette case made of human skin. But Greene did not want to make Segura 
a simple copy of his despicable model, partly for generic reasons – a com-
edy thriller cannot have a genuinely evil villain, and partly for intellectual 
reasons – Greene never created black or white characters: the relationship 
between Segura and Wormold works because of the way Greene complicates 
our sympathies and expectations.

So Segura is given some real complexity as a character. Making Segura a 

suitor to Wormold’s young daughter immediately puts the two characters into 
an archetypally tense personal relationship, particularly since the two men 
belong to the same generation: Segura’s age is not mentioned in the novel, 
but Kovacs was forty when the film was made, just five years younger than 
Wormold (and Guinness).

Segura is also allowed a philosophical outlook which could be seen 

as responding to his island’s position within the world order: he is, quite 
literall y, more worldly-wise than the Englishman. His description of the 
distinction between the torturable and the untorturable is undeniably cyni-
cal: “One never tortures except by a kind of mutual agreement” (Greene 

33.. Greene 1980:249. He also owns up to Stewart Menzies, head of MI6 during the War, 
as a model for aspects of the Secret Service chief, and Baron Schacht, whom he had 
known in Capri, for Hasselbacher (Greene 1980:250). The unsympathetic British ambas-
sador would have been based on Stanley Fordham.
34.. “Cuba’s Civil War,” The Times, January 3, 1959, in Greene 1989:74-75. He recalled 
the same incident in a further letter to The Times supportive of the Cuban Revolution on 
February 21, 1962 (Greene 1989:109-10).

1958:189); but it is followed by a sharply observant account of just who 
belongs to the “torturable class”:

The poor in my own country, in any Latin American country. The poor of 
Central Europe and the Orient. Of course in your welfare states you have 
no poor, so you are untorturable. In Cuba the police can deal as harshly as 
they like with émigrés from Latin America and the Baltic States, but not 
with visitors from your country or Scandinavia. (Greene 1958:189)

Greene had a good eye for postcolonial realities. As with Vietnam in The Quiet 
American, he saw how Third-World countries could become merely the setting 
for cold-war hostilities with which the global players would prefer not to sully 
their own territories. In Our Man in Havana Captain Segura is allowed a mea-
sure of respect, both because ultimately he is a nationalist and because Greene 
senses that the greater evils are elsewhere. Indeed Segura voices Greene’s own 
analysis, a remarkably prescient one for 1958: 

Of course we are only a small country, but we lie very close to the 
American coast. And we point at your own Jamaica base. If a country is 
surrounded, as Russia is, it will try to punch a hole through from inside. 
(Greene 1958:188)

Oriente never did see the establishment of those large weapons which looked 
like the insides of a vacuum cleaner, but something not dissimilar happened in 
1962 when Khruschev sent nuclear weapons to be stationed on Cuba (actually 
in the west, in Pinar del Río).35

Segura is even allowed to explain away the cigarette case made of human 

skin: the skin belonged to a police officer who had tortured Segura’s father 
to death.36 So this was an individual gesture of revenge which serves at least 
partially to deflect the stories of police brutality and torture. Wormold’s final 
judgment on Segura in the novel is: “All the same, he wasn’t a bad chap” 
(Greene 1958:262).37 Admittedly, when Wormold passes this judgment he is 
in Segura’s debt and has committed a murder, so it is not entirely obvious that 

35.. Greene even managed to parody a future novel about the Cuban missile crisis, Leon 
Uris’s mammoth cold-war tome, Topaz (1967), which was later turned into probably the 
worst film he ever made by Alfred Hitchcock. Hitchcock had offered £50,000 to buy the 
film rights to Our Man in Havana, but Greene had never admired Hitchcock, and wanted 
Reed to direct the film (Greene 1995:559). On the “secret kinship” between Greene and 
Hitchcock, see Sinyard 2003:96-108.
36.. “Even Captain Segura is allowed a father who was tortured to death by a previous gen-
eration of policemen, a personal fate which removes him from the gallery of wax figures 
inhabited by the believers in thrones and powers. His cruelty has a basis in his personal life 
while theirs belongs to a bland placing of institutions before people” (Smith 1986:143).
37.. In the film, slightly less ringingly, “he’s not without humor,” perhaps a knowing refer-
ence to Kovacs’s TV career as a comedian.

we should concur, but the remark further blurs any clear divisions readers 
might want to make between these two characters, one supposedly associated 
with torture and brutality, the other an upstanding Englishman who knows lit-
tle about politics but would kill to avenge his friend’s murder. Judith Adamson 
(1984:99) suggests that Segura is treated mildly despite being responsible for 
the book’s violence: “The far less sadistic Harry Lime [in The Third Man] 
received a much harsher sentence.” But Lime is guilty of killing and maim-
ing scores of children through his penicillin racket. Although Segura is hated 
by habaneros and has a reputation for violence, he does not commit any 
violent acts in the novel. Despite Wormold originally suspecting Segura of 
Hasselbacher’s murder, the killer turns out to be Carter, whom Wormold had 
initially been so pleased to see because Carter stood for “the English mid-
lands, English snobbery, English vulgarity, all the sense of kinship and secu-
rity the word England implied to him” (Greene 1958:210). Wormold felt safe 
with Carter – who had come to Cuba to murder him. All the killings we see 
in the novel and film are actually done by Englishmen: Carter kills the pilot 
and Hasselbacher; Wormold kills Carter. So much for English kinship and 
security, notions that Greene was very keen to puncture.

In November 1964 Graham Greene wrote a deeply sarcastic letter to The 
Daily Telegraph contrasting the U.S.-supported Vietnamese army’s trium-
phalist photographs of their torture of Vietcong prisoners with the good 
old days in which “hypocrisy paid a tribute to virtue by hushing up the tor-
ture inflicted by its own soldiers and condemning the torture inflicted by 
the other side” (Greene 1989:114-15). Then in November 1971 he berated 
the British Home Secretary, Reginald Maudling, for his defense of what he 
called the “deep interrogation” of IRA suspects – long hours of enforced 
standing, hooding, permanent noise, sleep deprivation. Nobody has ever suf-
fered permanent injury from these techniques, Maudling said, foreshadow-
ing Donald Rumsfeld’s breezy dismissal of exactly the same techniques at 
the Guantánamo Bay Naval Base. When applied by communists or fascists, 
Greene noted, we call it “torture,” but when applied by the British we down-
grade it to ill treatment (Greene 1989:154-56). The CIA calls it “enhanced 
interrogation.”38 That, fifty years on from Our Man in Havana, torture is 
still at the forefront of debates about how to combat terrorism, and that those 
debates should still focus on Cuba, but now on a U.S. base situated within 
the island – one suspects that none of this would have come as much of a 
surprise to Graham Greene.

38. See “Leave No Marks: ‘Enhanced’ Interrogation Techniques and the Risk of Crimi-
nality,” A Report by Human Rights First and Physicians for Human Rights, August 2007, 
http://www.humanrightsfirst.info/pdf/07801-etn-leave-no-marks.pdf; and McCoy 2006.

REfEREnCEs

adaMsOn, JUdiTH, 1984. Graham Greene and Cinema. Norman OK: Pilgrim Books.

—, 1990. Graham Greene: The Dangerous Edge: Where Art and Politics Meet. London: 
Macmillan.

aLLain, MaRiE-fRançOisE, 1983. The Other Man: Conversations with Graham Greene. 
Trans. Guido Waldman. London: The Bodley Head.

bEdaRd, B.J., 1974. Reunion in Havana. Literature Film Quarterly 4(2): 352-58.

CiRULEs, EnRiqUE, 2004. The Mafia in Havana: A Caribbean Mob Story. Trans. Douglas 
E. LaPrade. Melbourne: Ocean Press.

 —, 2006. La vida secreta de Meyer Lansky en La Habana. Havana: Editorial Ciencias 
Sociales. [Orig. 2004.]

dEPaLMa, anTHOny, 2006. The Man Who Invented Fidel: Castro, Cuba, and Herbert 
L. Matthews of the New York Times. New York: Public Affairs.

EnGLisH, T.J., 2008. Havana Nocturne: How the Mob Owned Cuba ... and Then Lost It 
to the Revolution. New York: HarperCollins.

Evans, PETER WiLLiaM, 2005. Carol Reed. Manchester, U.K.: Manchester University 
Press.

faLk, qUEnTin, 2000. Travels in Greeneland: The Complete Guide to the Cinema of 
Graham Greene. London: Reynolds and Hearn. [Orig. 1984.]

Ginna, RObERT EMMETT, 1959. Our Man in Havana. Horizon 2(2): 26-31, 122-26.

GREEnE, GRaHaM, 1958. Our Man in Havana. London: William Heinemann.

—, 1969. Collected Essays. London: The Bodley Head.

—, 1971. A Sort of Life. London: The Bodley Head.

—, 1980. Ways of Escape. London: The Bodley Head.

—, 1989. Yours etc.: Letters to the Press. Ed. Christopher Hawtree. Harmondsworth: 
Reinhardt Books.

—, 1990. Reflections. Selected and introduced by Judith Adamson. London: Reinhardt 
Books.

—, 1995. Mornings in the Dark: The Graham Greene Film Reader. Ed. David Parkinson. 
London: Penguin.

—, 2007. A Life in Letters. Ed. Richard Greene. London: Little, Brown.

HaRMETz, aLJEan, 1993. Round Up the Usual Suspects: The Making of Casa blanca – 
Bogart, Bergman, and World War II. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.

HaRT daváLOs, aRMandO, 2004. Aldabonazo: Inside the Cuban Revolutionary Under-
ground, 1952-58: A Participant’s Account. Ed. Mary-Alice Waters. New York: Pathfinder.

HULL, CHRis, 2007. Our Arms in Havana: British Military Sales to Batista and Castro, 
1958-59. Diplomacy and Statecraft 18(3):593-616.

LaCEy, RObERT, 1991. Little Man: Meyer Lansky and the Gangster Life. London: 
Century.

MCCOy, aLfREd W., 2006. A Question of Torture: CIA Interrogation, from the Cold War 
to the War on Terror. New York: Metropolitan Books.

MaTTHEWs, HERbERT L., 1961. The Cuban Story. New York: George Braziller.

MOnTERO, MayRa, 2008. Dancing to “Almendra.” Trans. Edith Grossman. New York: 
Picador.

PHyTHian, MaRk & JOnaTHan JaRdinE, 1999. Hunters in the Backyard? The UK, 
the US and the Question of Arms Sales to Castro’s Cuba, 1959. Contemporary British 
History 13(1): 32-61.

RObb, PETER, 1999. Midnight in Sicily. London: Harvill.

RObERTs, WaLTER adOLPHE, 1953. Havana: The Portrait of a City. New York: Coward-
McCann.

sanTaMaRia, HaydéE, 1980. Moncada: Memories of the Attack that Launched the Cuban 
Revolution. Trans. Robert Taber. Secaucus NJ: Lyle Stuart.

sCHWaRTz, ROsaLiE, 1997. Pleasure Island: Tourism and Temptation in Cuba. Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press.

sHERRy, nORMan, 2005. The Life of Graham Greene, Vol 3: 1955-1991. London: 
Pimlico.

sinyaRd, nEiL, 2003. Graham Greene: A Literary Life. Basingstoke, U.K.: Palgrave.

sMiTH, EaRL E.T., 1991. The Fourth Floor: An Account of the Castro Communist 
Revolution. Washington DC: Selous Foundation Press. [Orig. 1962.]

sMiTH, GRaHaME, 1986. The Achievement of Graham Greene. Brighton, U.K.: The 
Harvester Press.

sMiTH, WaynE S., 1987. The Closest of Enemies: A Personal and Diplomatic Account of 
U.S.-Cuban Relations Since 1957. New York: W.W. Norton.

sOndERn, JR., fREdERiC, 1959. Brotherhood of Evil: The Mafia. London: Victor 
Gollancz.

WiLLiaMsOn, MaLCOLM, 1963. Our Man in Havana: Opera in Three Acts: Libretto by 
Sydney Gilliat Based on the Novel by Graham Greene. London: Josef Weinberger.

PETER HULME
Department of Literature, Film, and Theatre Studies
University of Essex
Colchester CO4 3SQ, U.K.
<phulme@essex.ac.uk>

New West Indian Guide / Nieuwe West-Indische Gids vol. 82 no. 3 & 4 (2008):211-235

CaTHERinE bEnOîT

SAINT MARTIN’S CHANGE OF POLITICAL STATUS: 
INSCRIBING BORDERS AND IMMIGRATION LAWS 

ONTO GEOGRAPHICAL SPACE

Anthropologists often analyze globalization as the circulation of goods, peo-
ple, and ideas that triggers the decrease in nation-state prerogatives and the 
opening of nation states’ borders. In such an analysis, migrations are trans-
national: people move back and forth between their home country and the 
host country. Economic and demographic change in St. Martin seems to be 
a model for the usual scholarly approach to study globalization.1 As for the 
circulation of goods and capital, the economic growth of St. Martin as an 
offshore financial center and a free port has been due to the movement of 
untaxed capital for the development of tourism. Where the circulation of peo-
ple is concerned, up until recently no visa was required for Caribbean citizens, 
and the absence of a border between the French and the Dutch sides ensured 
the movement of people from the Caribbean, Asia, and Europe – who make 
up nearly 80 percent of the total population – between the two parts of the 
island. The recent migrations of these people succeeded the migrations of St. 
Martiners themselves who, from the late nineteenth century until the 1960s, 
moved to other Caribbean islands or the east coast of the United States either 
seasonally or permanently. Thus residents of St. Martin have family networks 
that cover several continents and which can be characterized as transnational. 
Finally, with regard to the circulation of ideas, English is the mother tongue 
of St. Martiners, while French and Dutch are the official languages used by 
the governments. Most residents are multilingual and speak English, French, 
Spanish, and Haitian Creole. The change in the institutional status of the two 
parts of the island toward total independence from their respective regional 

1. This article was translated from French by Hanneke Teunissen.
I use “St. Martin” to designate the whole of the island, “Saint Martin” for the French part, 
and “Sint Maarten” for the Dutch side. The term “Saint Martinois” refers to those fami-
lies living on Saint Martin for several generations, “Sint Maarteners” to people on Sint 
Maarten, and “St. Martiners” includes everyone. I use the term “residents” for the entire 
population, including foreigners. For a map of the island, see Figure 1.

metropoles, Guadeloupe and Curaçao, and a less restricting relationship with 
France and the Netherlands appear to be the political culmination of eco-
nomic, demographic, and cultural flows.

In reality, only very specific categories of people and goods may move 

freely to and throughout the island. The poorest migrants who move to St. 
Martin do so at a high price: they live in a highly precarious legal, social, and 
financial situation. These residents, most of them without residency docu-
ments, earn less than the legal minimum wage and live in unhealthy housing 
conditions. They cannot leave the island for fear of not being able to return; 
they move around the island with difficulty for fear of being deported. Their 
mobility is the opposite to that of tourists, residents of European origin, and 
investors, who enjoy the benefits of duty-free shops and tax breaks on their 
personal and company incomes.

A second anthropological approach to globalization articulates the move-

ment and the enclosing of populations, the development of international 
institutions or multinationals, and the reinforcement of certain prerogatives 
of the nation-state. The globe has not become smaller, it has been reorganized 
into a hierarchical unity of unequal spaces (Heyman 2004). In the anthropol-
ogy of borders, which has until recently focused on the study of transborder 
communities, the analysis has shifted to the political definition of the bor-

Figure 1. Map of St. Martin

Marigot

French Airport

Saint Martin

Terres 
Basses

St. Maarten

International 

Airport

Philipsburg

 
0 
1 
2

km

N

S

E
W

ders of contemporary states, and studies have shown how the borders of the 
most prosperous zones are being strengthened.2 Examples of these borders 
are the wall at the Mexico-U.S. border, the minefields on the eastern border 
of Europe, and the wire fences around the Spanish enclaves of Ceuta and 
Melilla in Morocco. However, borders are also represented by restrictive 
legislation on the entry and stay of foreigners.

In this article, I examine, above all, the articulation between Saint 

Martin’s institutional change and the production of a political space charac-
terized by the legal and spatial redefinition of the island’s borders. A proc-
ess of territorialization accompanies the creation of the overseas collectiv-
ity of Saint Martin, causing the island’s borders to be closed to foreigners 
from the Caribbean and the presence of the French state to be reinforced.3 
Furthermore this article introduces two aspects of Caribbean migration that 
are infrequently dealt with. I bring to light the existence of intra-Caribbean 
migratory movements, in contrast to most studies that focus on migration to 
the European and North American continents, and describe the political and 
legal barriers restricting these migratory movements, which the concept of 
transnationalism has in part helped to mask (Puri 2003).

THE ECOnOMiC and dEMOGRaPHiC EvOLUTiOn Of sT. MaRTin

In the referendum of December 7, 2003 on the status change of the over-
seas departments of Guadeloupe and Martinique, Saint Martin, a commune 
of Guadeloupe, opted to separate from Guadeloupe both administratively 
and politically, and to increase its autonomy in relation to the French metro-
pole. In February 2007, Saint Martin became an overseas collectivity (COM, 
Collectivité d’outre-mer) administered by a territorial counsel elected by 
the population.4 Sint Maarten is following a similar evolutionary path. In a 
series of referendums between 2000 and 2005, the islands of the Federation 

2. Wilson & Hastings 1998, Vila 2003, Cunningham 2004, Cunningham & Heyman 
2004.
3. The following analysis is based on several stays on Saint Martin since 1994 which 
were dedicated to the therapy management of people living with HIV or sickle cell anemia, 
and to the change in institutional status. I would like to thank the anonymous reviewers of 
this journal for their suggestions and advice, as well as Franck Bardinet and Claire Rodier 
for their feedback, and Marie Duflo for her attentive and painstaking reading of the analy-
sis of immigration laws in overseas France. I would not have been able to draw the map of 
Saint Martin without the assistance of Frank Fulchiero at Connecticut College.
4. St. Barthelemy, formerly a commune of Guadeloupe, is engaged in the same process. 
Legally, the two COMs are governed by the Loi Organique (2007-223) which states the 
application of the Constitution and the Loi Ordinaire (2007-224), both dating from February 
21, 2007. They fall under the authority of a prefect delegated to the prefect of Guadeloupe.

of the Netherlands Antilles, consisting of Curaçao, the seat of the federal 
government, Bonaire, Saba, St. Eustatius, and Sint Maarten voted to change 
their status. The Netherlands Antilles will cease to exist as a federation. Each 
island will have a one-on-one relationship with the Netherlands, either with 
tighter or looser ties to The Hague. In the very near future, Sint Maarten will 
become an autonomous territory of the Netherlands.

The political evolution of St. Martin is a response to the great economic 

and demographic upheavals that the island experienced since the 1960s for 
the Dutch part, and for the French part it was in the 1980s when economic 
development based on tourism was set in motion.

THE dEvELOPMEnT Of TOURisM

The economic development of St. Martin is based on the offshore and tour-
ism services it offers. Between the beginning of the 1960s and the beginning 
of the 1990s, the number of tourists and cruise ship passengers choosing St. 
Martin as a vacation destination increased fiftyfold.5 In 2004, with approxi-
mately 1.5 million visitors from cruise ships per year and nearly 500,000 
visitors coming to St. Martin by air from the Dutch side – few visitors come 
by air or sea to the French side because the international airport and deep-
water harbor are located in Philipsburg – St. Martin has become the island 
with the most visitors of all the islands in the Lesser Antilles.6 St. Martin has 
the world’s highest tourism penetration index among forty-seven islands with 
comparable demographic characteristics and a similar level of development.7 
The French and Dutch sides of the island attract very different types of tour-
ists. Restaurants in Grand Case and luxury boutiques in Marigot appeal to a 
wealthy clientele, whereas tax refund electronics stores and shops for cheap 
jewelry in Philipsburg and hotel-casinos draw more middle-class tourists. 

Klaus de Albuquerque and Jerome McElroy (1991) have proposed a 

model for the development of tourism that explains the economic, demo-
graphic, and environmental changes of the small islands of the Caribbean 
whose development is based on tourism.8 The model describes three stages: 

5. In 1965, 23,835 tourists visited the island; in 1993 there were more than 1,100,000 
visitors. See Chardon & Hartog 1995.
6. Central Bureau of Statistics Netherlands Antilles: http://www.central-bureau-of-sta-
tistics.an/traffic/traffic_n7.asp and http://www.central-bureau-of-statistics.an/traffic/traf-
fic_n9.asp.
7. That is, islands with a population of one million inhabitants and an area less than 
20,000 km2, which have opted for tourism-based development. See McElroy 2004.
8. These authors have simplified and adapted the model to the Caribbean situation, bas-
These authors have simplified and adapted the model to the Caribbean situation, bas-

ing it on the “product cycle model” developed in the 1980s by Butler (1980). This model 
was criticized because characteristics of one stage of development could also be those of 

emergence, expansion, and maturity, the last being characterized by slow or 
no growth at all (de Albuquerque & McElroy 1991, 1995). The evolution of 
tourism on St. Martin is a good example of this process. From an island that 
was frequented by the jet set, it has become an island of middle-class tour-
ism, one that consists in particular of cruise ships that disembark a stream of 
visitors who come to spend one day in the tax refund stores in Philipsburg.9 

The emergence phase corresponds to the 1960s, when subsequent to 

the U.S. embargo on Cuba, St. Martin became a destination for wealthy 
Americans (Samson 1989). The first hotels were small and were built on the 
waterfronts at Philipsburg and Little Bay.

The expansion phase began in the 1970s in Sint Maarten and in the 1980s 

in Saint Martin. On the Dutch side it was marked by the development of 
mass tourism with the construction of hotel complexes that had a capacity 
of 100 to 600 rooms and a casino. The number of rooms doubled between 
1980 and 1990.10 Investments that made possible the development of tourism 
on the French side were prompted by tax exemption regulations; the first, 
called Loi Pons, dates from 1986 and reduced the income taxes of individu-
als and introduced tax breaks for companies. The number of hotels increased 
by more than thirty between 1986 and 1992. Marinas were constructed to 
attract luxury yachts.

 In 1990, the Caribbean was the primary tropical tourist destination: 

eleve n million tourists vacationed there, and St. Martin was the most popular 
destination in the Lesser Antilles with 23.6 percent of all who visited that 
part of the archipelago going there. In 1990, St. Martin became the fourth 
most popular destination for cruise ships after Puerto Rico, the Bahamas, and 
the U.S. Virgin Islands. The number of cruise ship passengers spending a day 
on the island increased fivefold in ten years.11 In twenty years, the number of 
tourists arriving via Princess Juliana International Airport was multiplied by 
five: from 100,000 in 1970 to 528,315 in 1991.

The 1990s correspond to the maturity phase. Hurricane Luis (1995) is 

generally seen as the cause of the decline in tourism because of the infrastruc-
ture it destroyed, and because it was followed by other hurricanes (George 
in 1998 and Lenny in 1999). Effectively, since 1995 the number of people 
coming to the island had decreased, while vacancies in hotels had increased, 
though the early warning signs of diminished tourism could already be 
detected since the early 1990s. Since 2003 the number of visitors and the 

other stages and because they represent the development as being linear, which it is not 
always the case (Thomas, Pigozzi & Sambrock 2005). See also McElroy 2006.
9. The following remarks are based on my own observations and those of Sanguin 1982, 
Samson 1989, Chardon & Hartog 1989, 1995, and de Albuquerque & McElroy 1991, 
1995. 
10. From 1,670 in 1980 to 3,500 in 1990 (de Albuquerque & McElroy 1995:76).
11. 105,000 visitors in 1980 as compared to 515,000 in 1990.

occupancy of hotels have risen on the Dutch side, though they have not yet 
attained pre-Luis figures. On the other hand, the number of cruise ship pas-
sengers spending a day on the island is increasing significantly.12 

THE dEMOGRaPHiC COMPOsiTiOn Of sT. MaRTin

The construction and exploitation of the tourism infrastructure on St. Martin 
has relied on labor from the poorest Caribbean islands. These laborers were 
employed in construction and in the very lowest positions in the service 
industry and they lived in precarious conditions. Management positions, on 
the other hand, were held by Europeans, mostly from France. From 1970 to 
1990 the population increased by a factor of five and went from 14,000 in the 
1970s to more than 60,000 at the end of the 1990s.13

In 1999, the year of the last census of the entire population of Saint 

Martin,14 French of metropolitan origin or from Guadeloupe constituted just 
over 65 percent of the total population, with those said to be originally from 
Saint Martin estimated at 15 percent of the total population.15 The proportion 
of people of foreign origin was about 32 percent of the population, with a 
majority from the Caribbean. The proportion of the population living in Saint 
Martin that originally came from Haiti was 11 percent, about 5 percent came 
from Dominica, and 4 percent from the Dominican Republic.16

In 2001 the demographic composition of Sint Maarten was appreciably 

different from that of Saint Martin. The Dutch population originally from 
the Netherlands, the Federation of the Netherlands Antilles, or born on Sint 
Maarten was 50.6 percent. It was thus smaller than the French population of 
Saint Martin, though Sint Maarteners are more numerous than Saint Martinois, 
accounting for 30.5 percent of the population. The foreign-born population on 

12. From 1991 to 2006 the yearly number of visitors has tripled: it has gone from 469,667 
to 1,421,645 (personal communication, Edward Dest, St. Maarten Tourism Bureau, 2007).
13. According to the 1999 census, 29,112 on the French side. According to the intermediar y 
census in 2001, 30,594 on the Dutch side. In 2005 the population of the island numbered 
73,035, 38,000 on Saint Martin (data estimated by INSEE - Antilles Guyane & ACSE 
2006:9), and 35,035 on Sint Maarten (data estimated by the Central Bureau of Statistics 
2005:13).
14. Since January 2004, the census of the resident population in France has been carried 
out annually and is based on a sample of the population. Before that, it was taken every 
eight years and concerned the entire population.
15. This is an estimate because the census does not distinguish between Saint Martinois 
from the French Antilles and metropolitan French, contrary to the census of Sint Maarten, 
which does make the distinction.
16. I calculated these percentages from the data of INSEE - Antilles Guyane & ACSE 
(2006:17).

Sint Maarten is more significant, constituting nearly 50 percent of its popula-
tion. More than 30 percent of the total population is Caribbean: 10.1 percent 
of the population on Sint Maarten is from the Dominican Republic, 9.7 per-
cent from Haiti, 12.4 percent from Jamaica, Dominica, and Guyana.

According to the 1990 census, the percentage of foreigners living on 

Saint Martin was comparable to that of Sint Maarten, with proportionally 
more Haitians living on the French side.17 Between the census in 1990 and 
the one in 1999, the number of foreign-born inhabitants decreased by 5,700, 
with 2,600 of them being Haitians.18 The population of foreign-born inhab-
itants on Saint Martin decreased by 38 percent; whereas it represented 53 
percent of the population in 1990, it was no more than 32 percent in 1999. 
The reduction in the number of foreigners on Saint Martin is directly related 
to the policy of deportations implemented by the French government. From 
1992 to 1997, this policy led to the deportation of 3,275 foreigners.19

From an emigration island, with its population in the 1950s migrating 

to the United States, the island has become an immigration island, with the 
original population having become a numerical minority and the Caribbean 
population being kept in a situation where they do not have immigration 
papers.20 In the Caribbean context, such demographic dynamics and fates 
of foreigners are not exceptional. The same is happening on other small, 
dependent territories such as the Turks and Caicos Islands, as well as the 
Bahamas, which in the 1960s also opted for economic development based 
on offshore financial services and tourism. The exploitation of labor, largely 
of Haitian origin, enabled development, and now that the infrastructure of 
these islands has been completed, these laborers are subject to deportation 
(St. Jacques 2001; Brown 2004). The border prerogatives of nation-states are 
revealed in the monitoring of labor-related migrations (Puri 2004).

17. The data available from the 1999 census do not give percentages per nationality but 
according to the double criteria of nationality and place of birth, that is, immigration sta-
tus. An “immigrant” is a person born a foreigner in a foreign country but living in France. 
A “foreigner” is a person living in France who does not have the French nationality. On 
Saint Martin the percentage of foreigners and migrants being more or less the same, I felt 
I could compare the percentage of migrants on Saint Martin with the percentage of for-
eigners on Sint Maarten (INSEE - Antilles-Guyane & ACSE 2006:5). The appearance of 
the category of “migrant” in INSEE statistics is in fact recent and is based on the political 
stakes studied by Spire 1999.
18. INSEE - Antilles-Guyane & ACSE 2006:8.
19. In the aftermath of Hurricane Luis there were 2,769 expulsions and 506 voluntary 
departures (personal communication with the air and border police (PAF), August 1998; I 
was unable to obtain the figures for 1990-1991 and 1998-1999).
20. For an introduction to the complexity of Caribbean migration patterns in regard to the 
legal/illegal status of migrants, see Martinez 1999.

Because there was no monitoring of foreigners by the French government 

before the former were admitted to the island, deportations took the place 
of the nonexistent border inspections and therefore played the role of exter-
nal borders. Until August 2007, Saint Martin was an exception as regards 
the administration of its borders. First of all, the French government had no 
means of monitoring foreigners entering the island, regardless of whether 
they were visitors or residents. A large majority of people coming to the 
island come via Princess Juliana Airport or the harbor at Philipsburg, both 
on the Dutch side, where the air and border police (Police de l’air et des 
frontières, PAF) cannot operate. Besides, there is no border checkpoint that 
stands as a physical reminder of the border and shows the links of the two 
sides with their European metropoles or regulates the flow of people and 
goods between the two parts of the island. Travelers and residents move from 
the Dutch to the French side without being asked to show identification, in 
accordance with the Treaty of Concordia, which, in 1948, ratified the joint 
use of the island by France and the Netherlands and set the conditions for 
the circulation of people and goods. Only a monument erected in 1948 to the 
glory of three centuries of peaceful coexistence stands as a physical reminder 
of the border. The borders of the French territory are thus defined by Dutch 
legislation and are monitored by Dutch police.

Deportations occur at a proportionally greater frequency in the overseas 

territories than on metropolitan French soil. The French laws regulating the 
conditions for the entry and stay of foreigners in France contain specific 
articles for these territories which facilitate monitoring and deportations.

iMMiGRaTiOn LaWs and THE REinfORCEMEnT Of bORdERs

The overseas regions that, together with the French metropole, make up the 
Republic of France, include several institutional categories of territories. 
Apart from uninhabited territories and New Caledonia, which has a spe-
cific status, the first category of territories includes the former colonies of 
Guadeloupe, Martinique, French Guiana, and Réunion, which have acquired, 
with the assimilation law of March 19, 1946, the status of French overseas 
department (Département d’outre-mer, DOM). Since 2004 these DOMs 
have been designated as departments and overseas regions (Départements 
et régions d’outre-mer, DROMs), confirming that each of these entities is 
a monodepartmental region.21 The second category comprises the overseas 

21. In continental France, departments and regions are two distinct administrative enti-
In continental France, departments and regions are two distinct administrative enti-

ties, the region encompassing several departments. Each administrative entity is repre-
sented by an assembly – the general council for a department and the regional council for 
a region. The DROM is both a department and a region and it is represented equally by 
two assemblies.

collectivities of St. Pierre and Miquelon, Mayotte, Wallis and Futuna, French 
Polynesia, St. Barthelemy, and Saint Martin.

The French Republic is a plurilegislative state (Rolland & Lampué 1949). 

Legislation concerning the DROM comes under the principle of assimila-
tion and is identical to that of the departments and regions of France on 
the continent, unless, as the constitution of 1958 – the founding text of the 
Fifth Republic, which is still in force – indicates, their situation requires 
adaptations. These measures may not concern certain spheres such as nation-
ality, civil rights, the administration of justice, and criminal law. The laws 
regarding the COMs, with the exception of those applicable to St. Pierre 
and Miquelon, are based on the principle of exceptionalism: the laws are not 
applied automatically but only when their application is signaled by specific 
language to that effect.

The presence of foreigners in overseas territories is considered by the 

legislature to be a specific situation requiring adaptive measures. These mea-
sures may concern a department or even a district within a department, in 
the case of Saint Martin, or specific regions within a department, in the case 
of French Guiana and now Guadeloupe, showing the territorial applicability 
of the law. These measures accompany more restrictive policies than those 
defined for the territory of the French metropole. In the case of the COM, 
legislation is defined by an ordinance specific to each collectivity. 

An analysis of the legislation concerning the conditions for the entry and 

stay of foreigners allows for a concrete understanding of the implementation 
of immigration policies by the French government. It shows that a border 
is not so much a physical demarcation as a political project. “The boundary 
is not a spatial fact with sociological consequences, but a sociological fact 
that forms itself spatially,” to quote Georg Simmel’s 1993 groundbreaking 
analysis (Frisby & Featherstone 1997:143).22 Borders must be analyzed not 
as a limit, but in the context of the internal political project of the country that 
constructs them (Febvre 1962, 1949).

Until 2005, immigration laws in France were governed by the ordinance 

of November 2, 1945 on the entry and stay of foreigners in France. This 
ordinance was regularly modified in accordance with immigration policies 
defined by the government, leading on March 1, 2005 to the Code de l’entrée 
et du séjour des étrangers et du droit d’asile (Ceseda; Code concerning the 
entry and stay of foreigners and the right to asylum), which has already been 
modified by two laws.23 Following the 1973 oil crisis the French government 

22. Georg Simmel’s analysis of boundaries is part of an essay published in 1903, 
“Soziologie des Raumes,” translated for the first time in English in 1997 with the title 
“Sociology of Space” in Frisby & Featherstone (1997).
23. The law of July 24, 2006 regarding immigration and integration and the law of 
November 20, 2007 regarding control of immigration, integration, and asylum.

put an end to labor immigration. The modifications to the 1945 Ordinance, 
with the exception of the modifications made during the first office of the 
French socialist president, François Mitterand (1981-1988), and two laws 
passed modifying the Ceseda are inclined toward restrictions to the entry and 
stay of foreigners on French territory. 

It was not until 1980 with the act of January 10 called Loi Bonnet that the 

scope of the applicability of the 1945 Ordinance was extended to include the 
overseas departments. Until then, immigration laws were governed by two 
decrees dating from colonial times, one from July 29, 1935 for Guadeloupe, 
Martinique, and Réunion, the other from November 4, 1936 for French 
Guiana. Nevertheless, certain aspects of these decrees regarding the circula-
tion of foreigners between the overseas departments and the French metro-
pole applied until 1987 (Rodier 1999).

Since 1980, immigration laws always contain specific articles for the over-

seas territories. These adaptations are characterized by more restrictive condi-
tions for the entry, transit, and stay of foreigners, extended identity checks, 
and the easier and more rapid implementation of deportations.24 Legislatively, 
notably for Saint Martin, these adjustments took several forms: 
– The application of a law favorable to the conditions of stay of foreigners 

on French continental territory may be deferred for the overseas depart-
ments. Thus Loi Deferre, an act passed in 1981 which repeals the unfa-
vorable provisions of Loi Bonnet, was postponed for five years for the 
DOMs.25

– The application of particular articles of a law may be postponed. Thus 

the law of August 2, 1989 created the Commission du titre de séjour (an 
advisory body which conveys its recommendation to the prefecture as 
to the right of a foreigner to apply for the renewal of his or her resident 
permit) which the prefect must consult if he/she considers refusing the 
granting of or the renewal of a residency visa, the commission being only 
an advisory body. The law of January 10, 1990 created the possibility 
of filing a suspensive appeal with a judge against a deportation order so 
that a foreigner may be allowed to stay in France until the decision by a 
tribunal. These two laws postponed for five years the application of these 
provisions for the DOMs and St. Pierre and Miquelon. The law of August 
24, 1993 once more prolonged this exception for another five years, after 
which Loi Chevènement of 1998 extended it once again for five years for 
Saint Martin and French Guiana.

24. For a chronological review of legislation concerning foreigners, see Alaux 1997; 
GISTI, Cercle Frantz Fanon, Association des juristes pour la reconnaissance des droits 
fondamentaux des immigrés 1989; GISTI 2007.
25. In fact it never took effect because in 1986 the return of the political Right to power in 
the first coalition and the passing of the Loi Pasqua in the same year also meant a return 
to the positive aspects of the Loi Deferre.

– The permanence of restrictive provisions that were supposed to be tem-

porary. The internal security law of March 18, 2003 makes permanent 
the postponement of five years for the creation of a Commission du titre 
de séjour and the possibility of suspensive appeal for Saint Martin and 
French Guiana.

– The extension of articles enacted for one commune or one DROM to other 

communes or DROMs. The July 24, 2006 law called Loi Sarkozy extended 
for a period of five years to the whole of Guadeloupe the nonsuspensive 
character of appeals against deportation orders; until then this provision 
had only existed in the department for the commune of Saint Martin. The 
same law gives Guadeloupe and Mayotte the right to carry out identity 
checks without written permission from the district attorney; until then 
that possibility had only existed for French Guiana (since 1997).26

The right to asylum, which is the same for the metropolitan and overseas ter-
ritories is, in fact, applied differently, and overseas requests for refugee status 
have little chance of succeeding (Castagnos-Sen 2006).

In the same way as for immigration laws, circulation between the DROM 

and the metropole betrays a dual perception of French territory:
– The enforcement decree of the Schengen Convention, signed in 1995, 

which allows a foreigner with a short-stay visa (called a Schengen visa) 
entering one of the signatory countries, or one of those associated with 
the convention, to travel freely between these states does not apply to the 
French overseas territories even though it does apply to the overseas ter-
ritories of Spain – the Canary Islands – and Portugal – the Azore Islands 
and Madeira.

– A Schengen visa, which is valid for entry to the French metropole, is not 

valid for the DROM and vice versa.

– Even if no visa is required to enter the French metropole, a visa may nev-

ertheless be required for the DROMs, depending on the nationality of the 
foreigner (Duflo 2007).

– Different visas are necessary to travel from one DROM to the other, 

except those in the Americas (Rodier 1999).

dEPORTaTiOns in THE GUisE Of bORdER COnTROL

Between 2002 and 2007, when the present president of the French Republic, 
Nicolas Sarkozy, was the Minister of the Interior (2002-2004 and 2005-2007) 
five laws pertaining to immigration or asylum and five other laws concern-

26. In France, the police may only check one’s identity in the event of a flagrant delict or 
with a written order from the public prosecutor for a specific zone in the territory where 
offences are likely to occur. 

ing criminal infractions, the war on terrorism, and security were passed. 
In 2003 the implementation of a policy aiming to increase the number of 
deportations of foreigners without documents led to, in 2006, quotas being 
assigned to each prefecture, and the civil servants at these prefectures are 
penalized if they do not meet their set targets.27 The creation of a Ministry of 
Immigration, Integration, National Identity, and Co-development (Ministère 
de l’immigration, de l’identité nationale et du co-développement) by presi-
dential decree on May 18, 2007 upholds the idea that migrants threaten the 
identity of the French nation – insofar as the concept of a national identity is 
pertinent – and that they must be deported. 

The use of the word rafle (raid) for the massive arrests of foreigners is 

subject to debates in France because historically it was used as a term for 
the arrests of Jews during World War II and the Algerian population during 
the Algerian War of Independence. The Dictionnaire historique de la langue 
française (The historic dictionary of the French language) unambiguously 
defines rafle as a “police method” consisting of “arresting people in great 
numbers” (Rey 2000). An examination of the attitude and methods of the 
French police in the past and today shows similarities that justify using the 
term. There are at least four similarities: 
– a certain number of individuals living on French soil are considered unde-

sirable;

– techniques used to detain people designated as suspects are identical: 

sending misleading invitations to prefectures to “trap” the undocumented 
foreigner once there, the school arrests of children for so-called humani-
tarian reasons, that is, so as not to separate deported parents and children 
– though detaining parents whose children are born and go to school in 
France could be considered humanitarian – home arrests, mass arrests by 
neighborhood racial profiling;

– confinement in detention centers before deportation;
– group deportations, these days in charter flights.28

27. Because they had not met the quotas assigned to their departments, nineteen prefects 
were summoned on October 14, 2007 by the Minister of the Interior (M. C. T. & A. N., 
“Brice Hortefeux convoque les préfets qui n’expulsent pas assez,” Le Figaro, October 14, 
2007). The French president dismissed the director of the police générale of the prefecture 
of Paris (DPGPP) by decree on January 16, 2008 for not having met the deportation quota: 
he had been responsible for only 2,800 instead of 3,680 deportations (Giovannoni 2007).
28. For this analysis I draw upon Terray 2006, and blogs by Jean-Pierre Dubois, “Techni-
quement, rafle est le mot juste,” Contrejournal, 27 September 2007, http://contrejour nal.
blogs.liberation.fr/mon_weblog/2007/09/jean-pierre-dub.html, and Laurent Giovannoni, 
“Les rafles ont commencé quand la police avait du mal à atteindre ses objectifs,” Contre-
journal, 28 September 2007, http://contrejournal.blogs.liberation.fr/mon_weblog/ 2007/ 
09/giovannoni.html.

The increase in the number of deportations and the manner in which arrests 
are conducted have led the secretary general of Cimade, an association which 
plays a major role in France in supporting and defending foreigners, in par-
ticular of people requesting asylum, to speak of “the industrialization of 
deportations.”29

Though the raids in metropolitan France in their current form reappeared 

in 2003, when through the circular of October 22, the Ministry of the Interior 
requested that the number of deportations be doubled, they had already been 
taking place in the overseas territories at the beginning of the 1990s, espe-
cially in French Guiana and on Saint Martin, where adaptations to the 1945 
Ordinance facilitated deportations. Everyone living on Saint Martin in the 
1990s can recall the early-morning police raids: the red vans of the PAF driv-
ing towards the Haitian neighborhoods, men warning, by telephone or by 
cries, of the arrival of the police, the encircling of the neighborhoods, warrant-
less work and home arrests, and the airplanes on Tuesdays and Fridays at the 
Grand Case airport that flew off the deportees without the legal deportation 
measures having been observed. Hurricane Luis, which in September of 1995 
left the island in ruins, presented the French state, the municipality of Saint 
Martin, and the government of Sint Maarten with the opportunity of razing the 
shanty towns of the island, the collection of “cardboard palaces” as two jour-
nalists called them, and increasing the number of deportations.30 A delegation 
of lawyers, members of a Martiniquan association in support of foreigners’ 
rights (Association Solidarité Karayib, ASSOKA), as well as a larger delega-
tion consisting of several French associations for the protection of the rights 
of foreigners and the unions of judges and lawyers of France (Syndicat de la 
magistrature, Syndicat des avocats de France) concluded that the destruction 
of these homes was illegal. Several French tribunals recognized the respon-
sibilities of the municipality and the French government, but appeals slowed 
down the procedures leading to compensation (Manville 1999). The arrests 
took place in the morning at the time that workers were heading to their jobs, 
and on days when Maternal and Child Health Office (Protection maternelle et 
infantile) visits were held at the hospital or public clinics. This led to dimin-
ished activity at the hospital in Marigot and there was a notable decrease in 
the number of deliveries following Hurricane Luis (Bardinet, de Caunes & 
Hamlet 1995). From 1993 to 1997 there were about 460 to 600 deportations 

29. Karl Laske, “Interview de Laurent Giovannoni ‘On est confronté à une industrialisa-
tion de l’éloignement,’” Contrejournal, December 28, 2007, http://contrejournal.blogs.
liberation.fr/mon_weblog/2007/12/on-est-confront.html.
30. Mario Kleinmoedig & Henky Looman, “Paleizen als van ‘karton,’” Beurs Magazine, 
no. 12, 1995, pp. 14-17. Where Saint Martin is concerned, as of December 31, 1995, the 
number of official voluntary returns since September 6, 1995 was 506, the number of 
deportations between September 6 and December 31 was 190 (ASSOKA et al. 1996).

per year. They seem to have decreased thereafter: from 2001-2006 there were 
1,931 deportations, an average of 257 per year.31

The year 2006, which is the year deportation quotas were introduced, 

marks a turning point in the increase of deportations. They reached a figure 
of 413, surpassing the objective of 280 set by the Ministry of the Interior. 
The number for the first half of 2007 was 263, whereas the goal set by the 
Ministry of the Interior was 300 for the year. Identity checks are carried out 
as part of the raids, or on a more individual basis, such as in the operating 
room of the hospital of Saint Martin.

The refusal of employers to register their employees, the near total absence 

of social assistance for undocumented or documented foreigners from the com-
mune of Saint Martin and the regional council of Guadeloupe, and the infre-
quency with which residence permits are granted together shape the precarious-
ness of the living conditions of the foreign population, so that these populations 
are more susceptible to economic exploitation. The foreign population lives 
in “legal and structural marginalization,” to quote Paul Brodwin’s character-
ization of the Haitian situation in Guadeloupe, which makes their economic 
exploitation easier and facilitates their deportation when they are deemed to 
have become too numerous (Brodwin 2003). Undocumented foreigners are 
people who work but who are not registered. In many cases employees, if they 
wish to be registered, pay their employers social security taxes. The number 
of jobs rose from 2,800 in 1982 to 12,000 in 1990, but there were hardly 400 
employees registered between 1985 and 1991 for the 2,685 companies oper-
ating on the island (Marie 1991). After Hurricane Luis, to protest against the 
growing number of deportations which were going to deprive them of cheap 
labor, some entrepreneurs went as far as slashing police car tires to limit the 
number of round-ups (Alaux & Tillie 1996). According to the local intelli-
gence services, between 5,000 and 10,000 persons are presently undocumented 
on Saint Martin, which amounts to between 40 and 80 percent of the 13,000 
“immigrants” living on the territory (Comité interministériel de contrôle de 
l’immigration 2007:170-1; INSEE - Antilles Guyane & ACSE 2006:9).

“inbETWEEniTy,” THE POLiTiCaL bORdERs Of sOCiaL WELfaRE, 

and THE “REGiME Of MObiLiTy”

The concept of “inbetweenity” proposed by Dennis Brown (2004) to 
characte r ize the position of Haitian migrants on the Turks and Caicos 
Islands also applies to the Caribbean migrants on Saint Martin, particularly 

31. Comité interministériel de contrôle de l’immigration (2006, 2007) for the period 
2001-2005 and year 2006 respectively. Personal communication with the PAF for the first 
half of 2007.

Haitians. As a result of their undocumented sojourn, migrants occupy the 
social and spatial fringes of their host country – the bush on the Turks and 
Caicos Islands, certain neighborhoods on the periphery of Saint Martin 
where they hide away for fear of being deported. In a context of discrimina-
tion and human rights violations, on Saint Martin, just as on the Turks and 
Caicos Islands, migrants access work with difficulty, and health care and 
social services limitedly. In fact, the borders are deterritorialized; they are 
institutional (Spener & Staudt 1998).

For John Crowley (2005) the “institutional border” consists of mecha-

nisms which turn access to social security into a site of immigration con-
trol away from the physical border enclosing a territory. On Saint Martin, 
this institutional border has always existed because of the difficulty, if not 
impossibility, for foreigners, even those with documents, to get access to 
the welfare benefits that French law guarantees. In a sense this institutional 
border became territorial in 1999 with the introduction of CMU (Couverture 
médicale universelle, free basic medical care for everyone) which requires 
foreigners to show proof of having been on French soil for three months in 
order to receive care. This border has been strengthened in that social assis-
tance and the prefecture demand additional proof of residency in order to 
provide social care or grant residency permits.

Take, for example, the question of the one-year resident permits for care 

(visa de séjour pour raison médicale) which intersects that of visa delivery 
and access to social assistance. Obtaining such a one-year, renewable permit, 
extended to foreigners who suffer from an extremely serious illness which 
cannot be treated in the country of origin, is a real obstacle course, replete 
with persecutory measures. How well the file is put together depends upon 
the abilities of the social workers at the hospital who have increasingly been 
led to educate themselves about the law in order to be able to deal with the 
difficulties and arbitrariness of the administration.

The notifications of the medical inspector of Guadeloupe have always been 

in favor of granting these permits, which the prefecture has never denied until 
now. Today nearly 350 foreigners benefit from this right to a stay for medical 
reasons. Nevertheless, the person requesting permission rarely receives an 
actual document giving permission, but only three-month extension slips. The 
actual permits are printed in France, and employees of the prefecture recently 
protested that there was no request form to get them, even though the form 
is available on the internet. And in the case of permits delivered a few days 
before their expiry date, employees of the prefecture either throw them away 
or staple them to the receipt of the renewal request if the receipt is ready at 
that moment. The permits are only delivered or renewed with great difficulty 
under the pretext that the person requesting such a permit has committed vari-
ous offences. Such is the case of Mr. R, who had been suffering from a chronic 

illness for ten years and in August 2005 was refused a seventh permit, with the 
claim that Martinique had issued a deportation order for him in 1980.32 

Mr. R asserts that he has never been to Martinique. Since many surnames 

in the Caribbean are homonymous, there is a strong chance that the deporta-
tion order on Martinique was issued for someone else. The subprefecture of 
Saint Martin, however, demanded that Mr. R supply them with proof that the 
order has been repealed if he wishes to remain on Saint Martin. In November 
2006 the prefecture of Martinique informed the subprefecture of Saint Martin 
that it cannot repeal the deportation order because the file of Mr. R or the per-
son with the same name has been lost. The prefecture specified that if Mr. 
R does not pose a threat to the public order there is no reason to deny him 
a medical permit. It was necessary for a Paris-based medical NGO to inter-
vene and appeal to the Prefect of Saint Martin for a temporary authorization 
for Mr. R, which was granted in July 2007, allowing him to stay for three 
months. For more than two years, Mr. R did not have residency papers and 
had lost his medical coverage – as an undocumented foreigner he no longer 
had access to social assistance – and the various forms of social assistance 
that he had received until 2005. Moreover, he was in a very vulnerable posi-
tion if he were to be arrested and issued a deportation order. 

In a more banal and practically systematic way, the difficulties with this 

type of visa begin when the file is put together. Few foreigners are able to 
furnish the necessary proof of residency, that is, a rent receipt and a water bill 
bearing their name, or proof of housing with a photocopy of the ID of the renter 
– no landlord likes to declare that he is lodging an undocumented migrant, if 
only to avoid being convicted for helping undocumented migrants. As for the 
required identification papers, a passport, and a birth certificate, the spelling of 
the names is often different on all documents, leading to suspicion about the 
identity of the plaintiff. When all documents have finally been assembled, the 
vigilance, support, and expertise of the medical team at the hospital are needed 
to trace the files, prepare the renewal requests for the permits two months before 
the expiry date, keep a copy of the file, and photocopy the permit requests and 
extension slips, which the prefecture often claims to lose.

The visas for medical reasons belong to the “regime of mobility” that 

Horng-Luen Wang (2004) conceptualized to designate state control over the 
movement of persons from the moment a passport or visa has been issued. This 
“regime of mobility” which defines the political border is based on territorial 
residency and is more restricted now that Saint Martin is a collectivity.

32. The name and place of residence of this person have been changed to protect his 
identity.

THE CREaTiOn Of nEW bORdERs

A speech by the mayor of the commune before the senatorial commission 
on the island in January 2006 set the tune for upcoming policies concerning 
foreigners. After having described the way in which “the presence of the 
population of immigrants overburdens the collectivity in collective needs 
and resources” he specified “[that] the territory of Saint Martin must be made 
socially less attractive for its Caribbean neighbors. Revising family reunifi-
cation is a priority. The same goes for the criteria for settling in the territory, 
which must become more restrictive. Without this the collectivity will not be 
able to function and is destined for failure.”33

The territorial council governing the collectivity of Saint Martin elected 

in July 2007 is currently preparing for the transfer of administrative compe-
tencies from the department/region of Guadeloupe and from the French gov-
ernment in the domains of taxation, regional planning, economic develop-
ment, and social affairs. Activities of the French government proper, such as 
foreign affairs, security, and immigration laws will remain under the control 
of the state. The change in status for Saint Martin will see even more restric-
tive migration policies being put in place. First, just as in the other COMs, 
an ordinance whose implementation is foreseen in 2008 will regulate the 
conditions of entry and stay of foreigners and will make deportations easier. 
Next the enforcement decree of a cooperative accord between France and 
the Netherlands on the shared surveillance of the island’s borders published 
in 2007 has allowed the PAF to begin the inspection of foreigners arriving 
on the island.

THE CREaTiOn Of an inTERnaL bORdER: THE REinfORCEMEnT Of 

THE insTiTUTiOnaL bORdER and ORdinanCE

Even though it is difficult to say precisely what a future ordinance for Saint 
Martin will contain, it is possible that it will be inspired by that of Mayotte, 
a COM in the Indian Ocean that has the most deportations of all French 
overseas territories. The number was at 13,258 in 2006, or 20 percent of the 
foreign population.34 The employees of the prefecture of Saint Martin draw 
a parallel between the migratory situation on Saint Martin and Mayotte. The 
poorest people in the Caribbean or on the Comoro Islands are said to be 

33. For the full text of the speech, see http://statut.sxml.com/index.php?option=com_con
tent&task=view&id=202&Itemid=35.
34. At the time of the census in 2002, there were 160,265 people. In 2006, there were 
9,633 documented foreigners as opposed to an estimated 50,000 undocumented foreigner s 
(Comité interministériel de contrôle de l’immigration 2007:171).

attracted to the island and they are said to migrate to French territories not 
because they find work there, but because their families benefit from social 
welfare, their children have access to the French educational system, and 
the women can deliver their babies in a French hospital. In the case of Saint 
Martin, one forgets that undocumented foreigners were reported to the PAF 
in hospitals and that numerous foreigners, in particular Haitians, had their 
passports confiscated at the front desk until they were able to pay the costs of 
their care, which could amount to several thousands of euros.35 

Without an internal border, people are able to circulate freely, that is, with-

out an identity check, between the French and the Dutch sides of the island. 
The French and Saint Martin authorities ceaselessly emphasize that not only 
undocumented foreigners living on the French side use the social, sanitary, 
and educational infrastructure, but also foreigners living on the Dutch side, 
who are not able to access care and the educational system without costs. The 
issuing of permits and the granting of social assistance will require a greater 
number of documents proving residence by the French side.

The ordinance will reincorporate the restrictive articles of the law of July 

24, 2006, called Loi Sarkozy 2, for Guadeloupe, notably the identity checks 
without written authorization from the district attorney within a one-kilomete r 
zone along the coastline. Given the shape and layout of Saint Martin, the 
inspections along the coastlines on the east and west will in fact function as 
internal border inspections while the border has no physical presence in the 
form of border control checkpoints.

THE MaTERiaLizaTiOn Of an ExTERnaL bORdER: sHaREd 

bORdER insPECTiOns bETWEEn THE fREnCH and THE dUTCH

An important change, tied to the signing on August 21, 2007 of an enforce-
ment decree of a cooperative treaty between France and the Netherlands on 
the shared inspection of the borders and retroactive since August 1, 2007, is 
going to take effect.36 

A pilot committee of ten people, amongst them two lawyers, is being 

assembled for the implementation of this treaty. PAF agents will be in charge 
of border surveillance for Saint Martin, while agents of the foreign police are 
charged with the responsibility on Sint Maarten. According to Article 13 of 
this treaty, agents will carry out the inspection of foreign nationals, except 
those from European countries, coming from countries to be drawn up in a 

35. It was not until September 2007 that one of the key figures involved in this form of 
embezzlement was arrested and incarcerated in Guadeloupe.
36. This accord, the groundwork of which began in 1979, was signed by France and the 
Netherlands on May 17, 1994 and then ratified by the French National Assembly on July 
25, 1995 and the parliament of the tripartite Kingdom of the Netherlands in October 2006.

list by the pilot committee. The pilot committee will instate a working group 
in charge of identifying flights that are “sensitive”; the list will be kept up-
to-date for joint controls. An emergency procedure will be put in place for 
flights that are not on the list but which turn out to need inspection.

Entry will be granted in accordance with the conditions defined by Article 

4, that is, essentially the possession of “a visa or a disembarkation authoriza-
tion valid for both sides of the territory allowing the crossing of the border.” 
This treaty will lead to the harmonization of the list of countries from which 
the citizens must have a visa to enter the island. If PAF agents ask for the 
removal of a person, the police of Sint Maarten will make the decision to 
remove that person.

“The border is an active verb” wrote Henk van Houtum (Van Houtum, 

Kramsch & Zierhofer 2005:3). In the case of the French overseas depart-
ments, the borders are active verbs of inspection and rejection of foreigners. 
Upon a proposal by the present Minister of European and Foreign Affairs, 
Bernard Kouchner, the senatorial committee of foreign affairs adopted, on 
December 11, 2007, a bill on transborder cooperation between France and 
Suriname to monitor the movement of people from one side of the Maroni 
River, while the populations living along the river have always occupied both 
sides at the same time – their settlements could be on the French side while 
their gardens were on the Surinamese side.37

The treaty is supposed to be the cornerstone of future policies on border 

inspections on Saint Martin, to such a point that for some employees of the 
prefecture “if the inspection of the entry of adults is going to be sorted out at 
Juliana Airport, we must focus on the code of nationality and the children.” 
On Mayotte, Ceseda already authorizes the registrar to contest the acknowl-
edgement of paternity, and a bill seeking to revise the nationality code was 
up for proposal in Parliament before being rejected by the Council of State 
(Uni-e-s contre une immigration jetable 2007).

In this context of border closings, the border is not simply a physical line 

marking the separation between two territories, it is made up of “ports of 
entry” which are, according to the analysis by Heyman (2004), the “nodes” 
of a world that is shutting itself off to the movements of populations.

COnCLUsiOn

The status change suggests four issues for a future research agenda. First, the 
institutional evolution of St. Martin toward a status of association with, rather 
than total independence from, the European metropoles follows the evolu-

37. For a summary of Bernard Kouchner’s hearing before the senatorial commission on 
foreign affairs, see http://www.senat.fr/bulletin/20071210/etr.html#toc.

tion of numerous small microinsular states which do not seek total political 
independence but which explore the various kinds of associations with their 
metropoles in order to retain the political and economic advantages tied to this 
dependence.38 Even more paradoxical, however, is that the transformation of 
Saint Martin into a COM reinforces the presence of the French government 
on the territory. How, therefore, do we characterize the postcolonial situation 
of the French overseas territories? Second, the creation of the COM entails 
the creation of a territory at an almost primary level: the delimitation of a new 
political entity by means of borders. As such, the anthropology of borders is 
also an anthropology of nationalisms that need to be closely explored (Wilson 
& Hastings 1998). Third, the place of Saint Martin in migratory policies illu-
minates the central role of the peripheral territories in defining France and 
Europe. Since the 1990s the island has been closing itself off to migrants, and 
the status of COM creates and strengthens new borders. St. Martin, called the 
“Friendly Island,” is often described as a laboratory for cultural encounters 
(Guadeloupe 2006), but in reality the island is an experimental laboratory 
of repressive policies regarding foreigners (Migrants Outre-Mer 2007). The 
cooperative accord on the shared monitoring of the island’s borders, the pos-
sibility of border inspections at the airport, the reinforcement of the insti-
tutional border for access to social assistance, the greater ease with which 
identity checks can be done and with which deportation can take place are all 
means which France and the European Union have also put in place to moni-
tor the presence of foreigners on European soil (Tsoukala 2005). The island 
has become an outpost for the most restrictive immigration policies of France 
and Europe. The borders of Saint Martin, like those of other DROMs, are the 
borders of overseas Europe. “The overseas fortress” is thereby one of the first 
walls of a Europe which is closing itself off to migratory movements (Uni-e-s 
contre une immigration jetable 2007). Actually, the study of border crossing 
in the context of globalization is the study of the permeability of borders, 
especially as concerns the circulation of capital, but it is also the study of the 
“bounding of bordering process” (Newman 2005), of “rebordering” (Spener 
& Staudt 1998), and of the closing of borders to the poorest populations and 
political refugees (Guild 2005). In the case of Saint Martin, and also of French 
Guiana and Mayotte, these borders are closing to the historical movements 
of populations in the region. For Mayotte and French Guiana, the migrant 
populations considered to be “illegal” are populations who, not long ago, 
were French, such as that of the Comoros before the 1975 independence from 
France, or populations that never defined themselves as French or non-French 

38. For a typology of the kinds of governance in the Small Antilles and the advantages 
of dependence, see Hintjens 1994, 1997, McElroy & Pearce 2006a, McElroy & Sanborn 
2005, McElroy 2006. For an analysis of separatist and autonomous tendencies, see 
Taglioni 2005. For the Dutch Antilles see Oostindie 2006, Oostindie & Klinkers 2003. 
For Sint Maarten see Altink 2003.

but as being transborder communities, such as in French Guiana. These immi-
gration policies are being developed at a time when France is also conducting 
cultural, linguistic, and religious battles in these territories. The implementa-
tion of these immigration policies on the fringes of the former colonial empire 
reflects the reinforcement of a republican ideal which rejects the demographic 
and cultural diversity of the French population.

REfEREnCEs

aLaUx, JEan-PiERRE, 1997. Des DOM en minidroit. Plein Droit (36-37):59-61.

— & PaTRiCk TiLLiE, 1996. Les charmes discrets de l’Etat minimal. Plein Droit 31:22-
25. 

aLTinCk, HEnRiCE, 2003. Remove or Retain?: The Border Question in St. Martin in the 
1990s. Journal of Eastern Caribbean Studies 28(4):26-55.

assOka, CCfd, GisTi, MEdEL, CiMadE, saf, and sM, 1996. Des étrangers sans droits 
dans une France bananière: En Guyane et à Saint-Martin. Paris: ASSOKA.

baRdinET, fRanCk, fRançOis dE CaUnEs & JEan-LUC HaMLET, 1995. Ile de Saint-
Martin: On n’expulsera pas l’épidémie par charter. Le journal du sida (79):37-38.

bROdWin, PaUL, 2003. Marginality and Subjectivity in the Haitian Diaspora. Anthropo-
logical Quarterly 76(3):383-410.

bROWn, dEnnis a.v., 2004. Inbetweenity: Marginalisation, Migration and Poverty 
Among Haitians in the Turks and Caicos Islands. In Sandra Courtman (ed.), Beyond the 
Blood, the Beach and the Banana: New Perspectives in Caribbean Studies. Kingston: Ian 
Randle, pp. 135-52.

bUTLER, RiCHaRd W., 1980. The Concept of a Tourist Area Cycle of Evolution: Implica-
tions for Management of Resources. Canadian Geographer 24(1):5-12.

CasTaGnOs-sEn, annE, 2006. Les conditions d’exercice du droit d’asile en France. 
Paris: La documentation française.

CEnTRaL bUREaU Of sTaTisTiCs (CBS), 2002. Fourth Population and Housing Census 
Netherlands Antilles 2001 vol 1 and 2. Willemstad, Curaçao: Central Bureau of Statistics.

—, 2005. Statistical Yearbook of the Netherlands Antilles. Willemstad, Curaçao: Central 
Bureau of Statistics. 

CHaRdOn, JEan-PiERRE & THiERRy HaRTOG, 1989. Essai de typologie du tourisme 
antillais. In Centre d’études de géographie tropicale du CNRS (ed.), Iles et tourisme en 
milieux tropical et subtropical. Talence, France: Agence de coopération culturelle et tech-
nique, pp. 21-33.

—, 1995. Saint-Martin ou l’implacable logique touristique. Les cahiers d’outre-mer 48: 
21-33.

COMiTé inTERMinisTéRiEL dE COnTRôLE dE L’iMMiGRaTiOn, 2006. Les orientations 
de la politique de l’immigration: Troisième rapport établi en application de l’article L. 
111-10 du code de l’entrée et du séjour des étrangers et du droit d’asile. Paris: La docu-
mentation française.

—, 2007. Les orientations de la politique de l’immigration: Quatrième rapport établi en 
application de l’article L.111-10 du code de l’entrée et du séjour des étrangers et du droit 
d’asile. Paris: La documentation française.

CROWLEy, JOHn, 2005. Where Does the State Actually Start? The Contemporary 
Govern ance of Work and Migration. In Didier Bigo & Elspeth Guild (eds.), Controlling 
Frontiers: Free Movement into and within Europe. Hants, U.K.: Ashgate, pp. 140-60. 

CUnninGHaM, HiLaRy, 2004. Nations Rebound?: Crossing Borders in a Gated Globe. 
Identities: Global Studies in Culture and Power 11(3):329-50.

— & JOsiaH MCC. HEyMan, 2004. Introduction: Mobilities and Enclosures at Borders. 
Identities: Global Studies in Culture and Power 11(3):289-302.

dE aLbUqUERqUE, kLaUs & JEROME L. MCELROy, 1991. Tourism Styles and Policy 
Responses in the Open Economy-Closed Environment Context. In Norman P. Girvan 
& David Simmons (eds.), Caribbean Ecology and Economics. St. Michael, Barbados: 
Caribbean Conservation Association, pp. 143-64. 

—, 1995. Tourism Development in Small Islands: St Maarten/St Martin and Bermuda. 
In David Barker & Duncan F.M. McGregor (eds.), Environment and Development in 
the Caribbean: Geographical Perspectives. Mona, Jamaica: The Univer sity of the West 
Indies Press, pp. 70-89. 

dUfLO, MaRiE, 2007. Où est “la France”? Plein Droit (74):3-6.

fEbvRE, LUCiEn, 1949. La terre et l’évolution humaine: Introduction géographique à 
l’histoire. Paris: Albin Michel.

—, 1962. Pour une histoire à part entière. Paris: Editions de l’Ecole pratique des hautes 
études.

fRisby, david & MikE fEaTHERsTOnE (eds.), 1997. Simmel on Culture – Selected 
Writings. London: Sage. 

GisTi, Cercle Frantz Fanon, Association des juristes pour la reconnaissance des droits 
fondamentaux des immigrés, 1989. Immigration dans les DOM: un statut colonial. Plein 
Droit 8:28-33.

—, 2007. Les spécificités du droit des étrangers outre-mer: Coll. Les cahiers juridiques 
du GISTI. Paris: GISTI.

GUadELOUPE, fRanCiO EfRaïn, 2006. Chanting down the New Jerusalem: The Politics 
of Belonging on Saint Martin & Sint Maarten. Amsterdam: Rozenberg.

GUiLd, ELsPETH, 2005. The Legal Framework: Who is Entitled to Move? In Didier Bigo 
& Elspeth Guild (eds.), Controlling Frontiers: Free Movement into and within Europe. 
Hants, U.K.: Ashgate, pp. 14-48. 

HEyMan, JOsiaH MCC., 2004. Ports of Entry as Nodes in the World System. Identities: 
Global Studies in Culture and Power 11(3):303-27.

HinTJEns, HELEn M., 1994. Évolution politique et constitutionnelle des Antilles fran-
çaises depuis 1946. In Richard Burton & Fred Réno (eds.), Les Antilles-Guyane au ren-
dez-vous de l’Europe: Le grand tournant. Paris: Economica, pp. 19-35. 

—, 1997. Governance Options in Europe’s Caribbean Dependencies. The Round Table - 
The Commonwealth Journal of International Affairs 86(344):535-47.

HOUTUM, HEnk van, OLiviER kRaMsCH & WOLfGanG ziERHOfER, 2005. B/order-
ing Space. Hants, U.K.: Ashgate. 

HyEsT, JEan-JaCqUEs, CHRisTian COinTaT & siMOn sUTOUR, 2005. Rapport d’in-
formation fait au nom de la commission des Lois à la suite d’une mission effectuée en 
Guadeloupe, à Saint-Barthélemy, et à Saint-Martin du 9 au 14 décembre 2004 par MM. 
Annexe au procès-verbal de la séance du 10 mai 2005. Paris: Sénat. 

insTiTUT naTiOnaL dE La sTaTisTiqUE ET dEs éTUdEs éCOnOMiqUEs (INSEE) - 
Antilles-Guyane & Agence nationale pour la Cohésion Sociale et l’Égalité des chances 
(ACSE), 2006. Atlas des populations immigrées de Guadeloupe. Pointe-à-Pitre: INSEE 
Antilles-Guyane.

ManviLLE, aLain, 1999. Epuration violente à Saint-Martin. Plein Droit 43:11-19.

MaRiE, CLaUdE-vaLEnTin, 1991. Travail illégal et immigration irrégulière dans les 
dé par tements d’outre-mer. Le cas: Saint-Martin. Paris: Ministère des départements et terri-
toires d’outre-mer.

MaRTinEz, saMUEL, 1999. Migration from the Caribbean: Economic and Political Factors 
versus Legal and Illegal Status. In David W. Haines & Karen E. Rosenblum (eds.), Illegal 
Immigration in America: A Reference Handbook. Westport CT: Greenwood Press, pp. 273-
92.

MCELROy, JEROME L., 2004. Global Perspectives of Caribbean Tourism. In David 
Timothy Duval (ed.), Tourism in the Caribbean: Trends, Development, Projects. London: 
Routledge, pp. 39-56. 

—, 2006. Small Island Tourist Economies across the Life Cycle. Asia Pacific Viewpoint 
47(1):61-77.

—, & kaRa b. PEaRCE, 2006. The Advantages of Political Affiliation: Dependent and 
Independent Small-Island Profiles. The Round Table – The Commonwealth Journal of 
International Affairs 95(386):529-39.

—, & K. sanbORn, 2005. The Propensity for Dependence in Small Caribbean and Pacific 
Islands. Bank of Valletta Review 31:1-18.

MiGRanTs OUTRE-MER, 2007. L’outre-mer – Laboratoire de la “lutte contre l’immigra-
tion clandestine.” Paris: Migrants Outre-Mer. 

nEWMan, david, 2005. From the International to the Local in the Study and Repre-
sentation of Boundaries: Theoretical and Methodological Comments. In Heather N. Nicol 
& Ian Townsend-Gault (eds.), Holding the Line: Borders in a Global World. Vancouver: 
University of British Colombia Press, pp. 400-13. 

OOsTindiE, GERT J., 2006. Dependence and Autonomy in Sub-national Island Juris dic-
tions: The Case of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. The Round Table – The Commonwealth 
Journal of International Affairs 95(386):609-26.

—, & InGE kLinkERs, 2003. Decolonising the Caribbean: Dutch Policies in a Compa-
ra tive Perspective. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.

PURi, sHaLini, 2003. Marginal Migrations: The Circulation of Cultures within the Carib-
bean. Oxford: MacMillan. 

—, 2004. The Caribbean Postcolonial: Social Equality, Post-Nationalism, and Cultural 
Hybridity. New York: Palgrave MacMillan.

REy, aLain (ed.), 2000. Le Robert – Dictionnaire historique de la langue française. 3 
vols. Paris: Dictionnaires Le Robert. [Orig. 1992.]

ROdiER, CLaiRE, 1999. Les entorses au principe d’assimilation. Plein Droit 43:9-10.

ROLLand, LOUis & PiERRE LaMPUé, 1949. Précis de droit des pays d’outremer et de 
la coopération. Paris: Dalloz.

saMsOn, MikE L., 1989. The Netherlands Antilles. In Robert B. Potter (ed.), Urbanization, 
Planning and Development in the Caribbean. London: Mansell, pp. 161-80. 

sanGUin, andRé-LOUis, 1982. Saint-Martin, les mutations d’une île franco-néerlan-
daise dans les Antilles. Cahiers d’Outre-Mer 35(138):123-40.

sPEnER, david & kaTHLEEn a. sTaUdT (eds.), 1998. The U.S.-Mexico Border: Trans-
cend ing Divisions, Contesting Identities. Boulder CO: Lynne Rienner.

sPiRE, aLExis, 1999. De l’étranger à l’immigré. La magie sociale d’une catégorie statis-
tique. Actes de la Recherche en Sciences Sociales 129:50-56.

sT. JaCqUEs, ERMiTTE, 2001. “Today Haitians, Tomorrow Bahamians”: Reassessing 
the Integration of Haitian Immigrants in the Bahamas. MA Thesis, University of Florida, 
Gainesville.

TaGLiOni, fRançOis, 2005. Les revendications séparatistes et autonomistes au sein des 
États et territoires mono- et multi-insulaires: Essai de typologie. Cahiers de géographie 
du Québec 49(136):5-18.

TERRay, EMManUEL, 2006. 1942-2006: Réflexions sur un parallèle contesté. Paris: Centre 
d’études et d’initiatives de solidarité internationale. http://www.reseau-ipam.org/article.
php3?id_article=1278#.

THOMas, RObERT n., bRUCE WM. PiGOzzi & RiCHaRd aLan saMbROCk, 2005. 
Tourist Carrying Capacity Measures: Crowding Syndrome in the Caribbean. The Profes-
sional Geographer 57(1):13-20.

TsOUkaLa, anasTassia, 2005. Looking at Migrants as Enemies. In Didier Bigo & 
Elspeth Guild (eds.), Controlling Frontiers: Free Movement into and within Europe. 
Hants, U.K.: Ashgate, pp. 161-92. 

Uni-E-s COnTRE UnE iMMiGRaTiOn JETabLE, 2007. Contre-rapport sur immigration et 
droit d’asile. Paris: Uni-e-s contre une immigration jetable. 

viLa, PabLO (ed.), 2003. Ethnography at the Border. Minneapolis: University of Minne-
sota Press. 

WanG, HORnG-LUEn, 2004. Regulating Transnational Flows of People: An Institutional 
Analysis of Passports and Visas as a Regime of Mobility. Identities: Global Studies in 
Culture and Power 11(3):351-76.

WiLsOn, THOMas M. & dOnnan HasTinGs (eds.), 1998. Border Identities: Nation and 
State at International Frontiers. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

CaTHERinE bEnOîT
Department of Anthropology
Connecticut College
New London CT 06320, U.S.A.
<catherinebenoit@mac.com>

New West Indian Guide / Nieuwe West-Indische Gids vol. 82 no. 3 & 4 (2008):237-263

LizabETH PaRavisini-GEbERT

“SOI-DISANT COLUMBUSES”: THE DISCOVERY OF 

DOMINICA’S BOILING LAKE AND 

THE COMMODIFICATION OF KNOWLEDGE IN 

COLONIAL SOCIETIES

No man is an island, entire of itself;

every man is a piece of the continent,

a part of the Main.

John Donne, Devotions upon Emergent Occasions (1623)

“My picture would be in the Illustrated London News,” 

he explained, rather pathetically. “I have always 

wanted to be in the Illustrated London News.”

Elizabeth Peters, The Mummy Case (1985)

It may indeed be “a truth universally acknowledged” that “no man is an island, 
entire of itself.” Nonetheless, the entirety upon itself that Donne assumes as 
a given in connection to islands may be true only as far as geography and 
geometry are concerned – or perhaps, in the case of the poet, as far as the pure 
idea, the literary conceit, goes. The truth is that given the pernicious history 
of European colonization around the world, no island has retained its entirety 
of itself for very long after being “discovered” by Europeans. One may thus 
wonder if Donne himself was quite unaware of the irony implicit in his verses. 
In 1596, more than a quarter century before he penned his famous lines, he had 
had his own brush with conquest and colonization. In that year, he had enlisted 
in the Earl of Essex’s unsuccessful privateering expedition against Cadiz, and 
in 1597 he had sailed with Essex and Sir Walter Ralegh in the near-disastrous 
Islands Expedition, which had sought to intercept Spanish ships bringing gold 
and silver from South America as they sailed past the Azores.

The un-colonized island, like Donne’s entire-of-itself-man, is a rare phe-

nomenon. Discovery, whether of island or man, entangles the discovered in 
a complex web of relationships and connections – of power, of capital, of 
language, of culture – that forestalls self-containment. It means to move from 

self-containment to the ambivalent state of being “a piece of the continent, 
a part of the Main.” The hierarchy of discovery may place the discoverer in 
an advantageous position, but it constitutes nonetheless a fleeting, unrepeat-
able moment, since once the surprise is surpassed, discoverer and discovered 
must turn to each other with an identical question – now what? The answer 
to that question, as far as islands around the world are concerned, has been a 
broad variety of colonialisms – as many, perhaps, as there have been islands 
to colonize. The processes that have become known as “colonization” are 
perplexingly complex, as they have emerged out of interactions between the 
colonizer and the colonized, each transformed by the other through peculiar 
symbioses, neither to remain the same. The colonization of islands, spaces 
where self-containment has often led to varied and idiosyncratic cultures, 
has produced myriad forms of colonialism that can hardly be subsumed by 
one singular term. The forms they take – and the changes they undergo in 
response to specific historical, political, economic, and social circumstances 
– are directly the result of the specificities of local conditions. They can best 
be understood, not by totalizing theories that essentialize a “colonial” expe-
rience and critique some apparently understandable and graspable notion of 
“colonialism,” but by a detailed knowledge of the historical and material 
conditions responsible for specific phenomena at specific times.

A rich vein of colonial phenomena whose study yields significant glimpse s 

into the various forms colonialism takes in the West Indies is found in the 
discoveries of Caribbean geological sites and phenomena that followed in 
the wake of Charles Darwin’s momentous five-year scientific expedition of 
1831-1836 – recounted in his Journal of Researches into the Geology and 
Natural History of the Various Countries Visited by H.M.S. Beagle (1839). 
Between 1839 and the first decade of the twentieth century – years during 
which natural history emerged as a scientific discipline – a number of scien-
tific and pseudoscientific travelers, aided and abetted by the increased ease of 
travel fostered by new technologies and bankrolled by Victorian prosperity, 
descended upon the Caribbean islands in search of anthropological glimpses 
at native societies and the opportunity to gaze at and collect specimens of 
local flora and fauna. Their particular gaze on the Caribbean entered into the 
debate over colonial control of the islands’ cultural, political, and economic 
development raging in the last decades of the nineteenth century. 

Among the targets of discovery in this period was Dominica’s Boiling 

Lake, a site whose exposure to the larger world in 1875 became the focus of 
heated debate in the island between Euro-American “scientific” knowledge 
and local “lore.” The lake is the centerpiece of the Valley of Desolation, a rock-
strewn, barren, rumbling valley of bubbling fumaroles and simmering pools of 
water nestled deep within the range of high forest-clad mountains of southern 
Dominica. The lake itself, fenced in by perpendicular banks of ash and pumice 
sixty to a hundred feet high, extends about seventy yards across and one hun-

dred and ten yards in length. It lies 2,300 feet above sea level, and its waters, 
heated to near two hundred degrees Farenheit, rise and fall to the pressure of 
escaping gases. It appears to the traveler, in the words of William Palgrave, one 
of its earliest European visitors, as “a gigantic seething cauldron, covered with 
rapid steam, through which, when the veil is for a moment blown apart by the 
mountain breeze, appears as a confused mass of tossing waves, crossing and 
clashing in every direction – a chaos of boiling water” (Palgrave 1877:372). 

I would like to offer here – through a discussion of the discursive com-

plexities of the discovery and exploration of the Boiling Lake – an example 
of the various ways in which the visits and resulting texts of the lake’s dis-
coverers enter the discourse of national formation in the Caribbean, seeking 
in many cases to reinscribe colonial and imperial categories threatened by 
emerging Creole elites and newly emancipated peasantries in the islands’ 
postslavery economies. The rhetorical complexities of the narratives of dis-
covery and exploration of the Boiling Lake opened a space where conflicting 
versions of history, clashing discourses, and contrasting disciplines conflated. 
The attempts of its discoverers to impose upon a specific Dominican space 
the cultural categories of Euro-American pseudoscientific discourse came 
up against a contestatory local discourse, resulting in a struggle to determine 
what negotiations were necessary for a particular narrative of the history of 
the lake’s discovery to emerge.

The Boiling Lake was allegedly “discovered” – that is, first visited by 

white Europeans – in January 1875. Its “discoverers,” Edmund Watt and 
Henry Nicholls, were young midlevel colonial officials in Dominica. Although 
only in their mid-twenties, they held the sort of positions unattainable for 
someone of their youth and inexperience except in colonial settings. Watt 
was a magistrate, and Nicholls, a recent graduate from the medical schools 
at the universities of Aberdeen and London, was superintendent of hospitals. 
As officials in the growing bureaucracy of the empire, they interpreted their 
mandate as representatives of the Crown as requiring their chronicling in 
great detail the natural and anthropological phenomena encompassed within 
their imperial gaze. Themselves avid readers of exploration narratives, and 
aware of the publicity value of such publications to help them out of a colo-
nial backwater, they reported their feat widely in the scientific journal Nature 
and the more popular Illustrated London News, The Times, and The Field. 
They recounted the “strenuous hike” – as Dominican anthropologist Lennox 
Honychurch realistically describes it – “in the tones of dramatic Victorian 
adventure, similar to exploring the Congo or reaching the source of the Nile” 
(Honychurch 1991:62). Their zeal in spreading the tidings of their momen-
tous achievement was such that by the time Hesketh Bell arrived in 1899 to 
take up his post as Dominica’s administrator, he acknowledged the lake to be 
“the chief ‘sight’ of Dominica” (Bell 1946:10). 

My interest in “encounters” such as that of the Boiling Lake stems in part 

from the understanding that such discoveries serve to historicize the speci-

ficities of the various forms of colonialisms operating in the West Indies in 
the second half of the nineteenth century. In “The Historical Anthropology 
of Text,” Neil L. Whitehead argues for the necessity of fully contextualizing 
the texts that result from “first contact situations” such as that of the discov-
ery of the Boiling Lake, which constitute a “special class of historical event 
which is much rarer and more limited than its iconography in current debates 
would suggest” (Whitehead 1995:55). Methodologically, he proposes that, 
in addition to the study of the internal tropes through which these accounts 
have been constructed, we 

consider native social and cultural praxis, particularly as expressed in 
native tropes, of course retrospectively constructed from artefactual, tex-
tual and oral records. While the description of this native praxis is obvi-
ously an initial object of European textual description, native praxis is 
itself a necessary and viable context for the interpretation and analysis 
of European texts: quite literally, it is a context – it “goes with” the text. 
(Whitehead 1995:55)

My approach to the study of this particular encounter – as illustrative of 
the responses of colonial representations and practices as specific to par-
ticular social, political, and geographical circumstances – follows Whitehead 
as well as Nicholas Thomas’s Colonialism’s Cultures which argues for an 
understanding of a “pluralized field of colonial narratives, which are seen 
less as signs than as practices, or as signifying practices rather than elements 
of a code” (Thomas 1994:8-9). Thomas has based his notions on Pierre 
Bourdieu’s analytic strategy, “which situates colonial representations and 
narratives in terms of agents, locations and periods” conducive to a vision of 
colonialisms rather than colonialism (Thomas 1994:9). 

The colony of Dominica had a complex early history. It had been one of 

several territories granted by Royal Decree to the Earl of Carlisle in 1627, 
but it was not successfully settled until the mid-eighteenth century, when 
French planters established sugar plantations on the island. Despite com-
ing firmly under English control on 1805, it remained, until well into the 
twentieth century, French at heart. The peasantry, and to a certain extent the 
powerful colored Creole elite of small-scale planters and merchants, held 
adamantly to their French patois or Kwéyol, even though government schools 
(to which the peasantry had very limited access) taught only English (Eliot 
1938:222). British influence, however, was manifest in the institutions, the 
administrative and legislative patterns, the political model, and the style 
of social life among the community of English settlers (Paravisini-Gebert 
1996:3-4). This white community was small and generally not very wealthy. 
Landowners often allowed their overseers to run their estates, and the island 
lacked the society rooted in grand estate houses that characterized the white 
upper classes of Antigua and Jamaica.

The island had, in fact, never partaken of the legendary riches spawned by 

the plantation economy. The fertility of its soil was legendary, but the sugar 
plantation was already past its heyday when the price collapse of the 1880s 
virtually wiped it out. Dominica, moreover, had always been a relatively inef-
ficient sugar producer. The planters’ ill-fated decision to switch from coffee 
to sugar cultivation in the 1840s had come just a few decades before market 
prices began the irrevocable decline (see Trouillot 1988:56-57). The island’s 
rugged terrain and poor infrastructure had kept the size of plantations small, 
and they could not compete with the larger, more technologically advanced 
plantations on other islands. The dependence on local overseers – many of 
them of mixed race – had contributed to the entrenchment of the powerful 
colored elite who exerted considerable influence on local government. The 
topography also made the black population much more independent; there 
had been, even before emancipation, large settlements of free Blacks and 
Mulattoes who owned land or lived as squatters on abandoned or neglected 
estates. After the sugar industry’s collapse, a number of potentially profitable 
cash crops were tried – cacao, vanilla, and spices, cassava for starch, rubber, 
Liberian coffee, limes, and most recently, bananas. Moreover, the colored 
elite dominated the Legislative Council; the Brown Privilege Bill of 1831 
had ended political discrimination based on race, leading to a majority of col-
ored members in the legislature by 1838 (Honychurch 1984:34). Throughout 
the nineteenth century the British colonial government attempted unsuccess-
fully to curb the influence of the colored elite by proposing changes that 
would give colonial officials more influence on government matters.

Henry Nicholls’s career as a colonial official in Dominica developed 

against the background of these political tensions. An ambitious man who held 
appointed positions in the local legislative council until his death in 1929, Dr. 
Nicholls built his reputation (and a modest fortune) on his scientific endeavors. 
In his two reports to the government (1880 and 1894) on the cure for yaws 
(which translated local curative practices into scientific discourse) added to 
the fame he had earned as the lake’s discoverer. His experiments in the cul-
tivation of lime at his estate at St. Aroment, it is claimed, set the foundation 
for the Dominican economy from the collapse of sugar exportation in 1885 
until the late 1950s. (Nicholls worked with his mentor, Dr. John Imray, on 
adapting the Martiniquan process of extracting essential oil from the lime rind 
[Trouillot 1988:60].) When James Anthony Froude visited Dominica in the late 
1880s, he described Nicholls as “the only man in the island of really superior 
attainments” (Froude 1888:164-65). The discovery of the Boiling Lake in 1875 
was, for Nicholls, the beginning of a career as a colonial official of scientific 
accomplishments. His initial reaction to the “discovery” however, was marked 
by awe rather than scientific restraint. His description of the “expedition” to the 
lake, published in the magazine The Field in June 1876 attempts to imbue the 
moment of arrival with all the wonder of grandiose achievement:

Scrambling over the masses of sulphur we attained the summit and from 
thence beheld a most marvellous sight. We seemed to be upon the brink of 
an awful abyss, from whence were vomited up volumes of hot steam and 
suffocating vapours. Loud rumbling noises and peculiar bubbling sounds 
saluted our ears; noxious sulphureous gases filled our nostrils. Altogether 
the sound was so strange, so unexpected, so wonderful, that many minutes 
elapsed before we were able to speak to each other. We stood still and 
gazed on. After a time the wind veered and blew aside the vapours, when 
we saw at our feet a Boiling Lake!1

Bernard Smith has suggested, in European Vision and the South Pacific, that 
“European control of the world required a landscape practice that could first 
survey and describe, then evoke an emotional engagement with the land that 
new settlers had alienated from its aboriginal inhabitants” (Smith 1985:9). In 
this his first description of the “view” of the lake – represented as being “at 
our feet” – Nicholls makes a fetish out of his “discovery,” eroticizing it in a 
mimicry of surrender and signaling its first salvo as a tourist sight. Whether 
this fetishizing of the view will lead to the control that Nicholls’s rhetoric 
takes for granted is another matter entirely. A discovered site, Thomas has 
argued, could be subsumed “to the form of a picture, and seeing a thing first as 
a representation and secondly as something beyond a representation created 
a peculiar sense of power on the side of the viewing colonist, which was of 
course not necessarily reflected in real control over the populations in any par-
ticular place” (Thomas 1994:112). Ironically, when placed in the context of 
Dominican society in 1875, Nicholls and Watt’s will-to-discover might very 
well have been inspired by their perceived need to help firm up English con-
trol over a colony and a local population consistently slipping out of British 
grasp. Lennox Honychurch has argued convincingly in The Dominica Story 
(1984) that so successful was the local resistance that Dominica became the 
only West Indian island where British colonial control was successfully chal-
lenged in the nineteenth century (see Savory 1998:5-6). 

Nicholls’s rhetorical approach is above all a mimetic element that lays 

bare the language of its pretext, revealing its antecedents in a growing litera-
ture of geographical exploration and discovery. His bombastic dissemination 
of information about the discovery of the Boiling Lake, of which the article in 
The Field is but one example, fulfills two functions. It indicates to the reader 
how he/she ought to assess the importance of the achievement at hand, while 
equating the text generically with the contemporary accounts of geographical 
discovery flooding the European book market. Nicholls, for example, appeals 
to the reader’s sense of wonder – an almost de rigueur rhetorical response to 
a discovery. Stephen Greenblatt, writing about the literature of the explora-
tion of South America, identifies wonder as the discoverer’s stock response: 

1. Henry Alfred Alford Nicholls, “Dominica’s Boiling Lake,” The Field, June 1876, p. 6.

“Wonder – thrilling, potentially dangerous, momentary immobilizing, charged 
at once with desire, ignorance, and fear – is the quintessential human response 
to what Descartes calls a ‘first encounter’” (Greenblatt 1991:20). 

Watt and Nicholls’s “reports” responded to a mimetic impulse mediated 

by the popularity of the narratives on geographical and scientific explora-
tion that had created a new breed of popular hero in Victorian England, the 
scientist-cum-explorer whose exploits were read widely in the pages of the 
Illustrated London News and other publications intended for the edifica-
tion and entertainment of the British middle and upper classes. The fabu-
lous expanses of terrain, the exotic locales and architecture, the wondrous 
tales of rituals and ceremonies, the unfamiliar peoples and races contrib-
uted to enhancing the nation and its Queen in the eyes of British subjects at 
home and abroad. As imperial propaganda, they served to justify conquest 
and colonization abroad, often providing the link between expatriate fami-
lies throughout the Empire. As entertainment, they encouraged the illusion 
among the middle classes that they possessed valuable “knowledge” that 
they could share with a pretense of “culture” during elegant dinner parties. 

The texts most closely linked to Nicholls and Watt’s adventure were those 

published between 1873 and 1875 by and about Lieutenant Verney Lovett 
Cameron (1844-1894) following his 3,000-mile walk across Africa from 
Zanzibar on the Indian Ocean to Benguela, on the Atlantic coast (later col-
lected in his Across Africa, 1877). In 1872, Cameron had been commissioned 
by the Royal Geographical Society to lead an expedition to locate and bring 
aid to the missionary/explorer David Livingstone (1813-1873), thought to 
be lost in eastern Africa. Livingstone’s adventures had been one of the most 
closely followed and richly reported of all exploration narratives of the latter 
half of the nineteenth century, and this intense focus turned towards Cameron 
as his expedition, shortly after leaving Zanzibar, met Livingstone’s servants 
bearing his body and continued on to Lake Tanganyika to recover the late 
explorer’s papers.

Cameron’s expedition had gone on to establish the lake’s outlet at the 

Lukuga River and trace the Congo-Zambezi watershed, reaching the African 
west coast in 1875. The lieutenant, unabashedly entrepreneurial, exploited 
his fame and dashing good looks to further his career as an explorer. Upon 
his return to England he hit the lecture circuit with élan, followed his exploits 
with his best-selling book, Across Africa, and for the rest of his short life 
was associated with commercial projects in Africa, among them the Cape to 
Cairo railway partially built by Cecil Rhodes and the African-Asian railway 
from Tripoli, Libya, to Karachi [now Pakistan]. 

Dominican writer F. Sterns-Fadelle, in a pamphlet grandly entitled The 

Boiling Lake of Dominica: A Historical and Descriptive Account of a Unique 
Phenomenon (1902), speaks of his own contribution to the discovery of the 
lake in 1875 as having consisted of lending Watt, an intimate friend from boy-

hood, his copies of Cameron’s descriptions of his African expedition. Having 
read Cameron, Watt, who “had always been given to indulge in the roving pro-
pensities which were to him as an instinct,” was inspired “with an enormous 
zeal to imitate his pedestrian prototype” in footing it across the island (Sterns-
Fadelle 1902:4). Watt’s first Cameron-inspired transisland trek was a cheery 
catastrophe. Abandoned by his guides, he loses his way in the mountains – an 
abandonment that Sterns-Fadelle compares, not without a trace of pompous 
irony, to Emanuel Gomez’s abandonment of Ferdinand Magellan on his voy-
age of discovery through the South American Straits. Search parties are sent 
out in fruitless pursuit, and Watt emerges from the deep tropical wilderness 
a week later, “a wild figure, clad in foul rags, with matted hair, bronzed and 
sunken cheeks and hungry eyes” (Sterns-Fadelle 1902:5). His reports on his 
wanderings among the sulphur-crusted boulders of the Grande Soufrière and 
of his intimations of the presence of “some important and unknown volcanic 
center in that region,” would lead to a second expedition during which the 
Watt-Nicholls party would reach the lake itself.

I want to return to Sterns-Fadelle’s report of Watt’s admiration and imita-

tion of Cameron’s texts as directly conducive to the Boiling Lake expedition, 
because it points to a most vital gap between their tale of the lake’s discovery 
and its rhetorical models. The discovery of the lake is an enterprise mediated 
by the narratives of the achievements of travelers trekking across vast con-
tinents (Africa, Asia, South America) in quest of natural wonders, which in 
turn lead to the appropriation of vast expanses of land and the incorporation 
of myriad peoples into the expanding British Empire. 

The discovery of the Boiling Lake, by contrast, is an island-bound enter-

prise that does not lend itself to hyperbolic epic treatment without a slight 
tinge of irony, given the noncontinental dimensions of the terrain to be tra-
versed. Dominica is, after all, a small island some thirty-five miles long and 
fifteen miles wide at its broadest expanse. It is not a land mass, despite the 
thickness of its forests and difficult topography, that can hide its geologi-
cal treasures from the truly committed explorer for very long. In this finite 
island terrain, Cameron’s continental expedition must be reduced to Watt and 
Nicholls’s “strenuous island hike.” Watt and Nicholls may write grandiosely 
about their achievement without self-irony, but more objective observers 
such as Sterns-Fadelle cannot. The latter will write of the discovery of the 
lake as an expedition “which marks an epoch in the history of Dominica,” 
but cannot refrain from showering good-humored irony on his friend Watt, 
who is credited with surviving his earlier ordeal to write “a thrilling narra-
tive” of his earlier adventures and sufferings as he “painfully” wended “his 
weary way through the four or five square miles covering the area of the 
sulphur beds” (Sterns-Fadelle 1902:7, 6). 

If irony and parody are Sterns-Fadelle’s strategies to account for the rhe-

torical gap between Nicholls and Watt’s narratives and an enterprise that 

lacks heroic proportions, the so-called discoverers will predictably seek to 
confer importance on their feat by turning to the native peasant population as 
ignorant, superstitious, unscientific mirrors to their comparative bravery and 
intrepidity. “Discourses of conquest,” Nicholas Thomas has observed, “often 
seem to operate through denigrated stereotypes, through types of ‘others’ 
such as the savage or lazy native” as they do in most accounts of the discov-
ery of Dominica’s Boiling Lake (Thomas 1994:124). 

Charles William Day, writing about Dominica in his Five Years’ Residence 

in the West Indies (1852) before the “discovery” of the Boiling Lake, already 
posited the white European would-be discoverer in a superior relationship to 
the native (peasant or Creole bourgeois alike), possessors of a lesser kind of 
knowledge, or of no knowledge at all. Claiming that two-thirds of the island 
territory has never been explored (revealing thus his own ignorance of exten-
sive eighteenth-century surveys and maps by the likes of Rigobert Bonne, 
Jacques-Nicolas Bellin, Thomas Jefferys, and Emanuel and Thomas Bowen), 
Day alludes to the natives’ lack of courage for exploration (i.e., enterprise) 
and intimates his belief that discovery is a European prerogative:

No one here has spirit enough to organize an expedition into the interior, 
out of the beaten track. Vague rumours occasionally come down from 
erratic negroes: but to the civilized world  – if the term be not misapplied in 
toto to the white population out here – the interior of Dominica is as much 
a terra incognita as the sources of the White Nile in Africa. ... A very fine, 
extensive lake is said to exist in the interior of Dominica but no white man 
has, as yet, seen it. Any race of whites might readily populate the moun-
tainous regions of these islands; and a very good way, too, it would be of 
gradually superseding the necessity for the negro. (Day 1852:239)

Day is writing at a time when geographical exploration had become the 
Empire’s chief weapon for expansion and economic development. His critique 
of the Dominicans’ lack of enterprise fits into a well-developed rhetoric of jus-
tification of continued colonization that requires the presentation of the natives 
(regardless of race or class) as lesser beings whom it is quite fit to dispossess. 
Lacking in all the attributes needed for supremacy – the result of ethnic, racial, 
cultural, technological, and economic inferiority – they are not equipped to 
value and exploit the land and resources they possess. His anticipation of forth-
coming discovery “by white [British] men,” as these geological features are 
already known to “erratic negroes,” outlines a series of discursive strategies 
that we will find oft-repeated in the many accounts of travels to the Boiling 
Lake that follow in the wake its “discovery.” Bravery will be the province of 
Whites; cowardice that of the natives. True knowledge, as an attribute of white 
civilization, must eventually replace the native’s “erratic” notions. Discovery 
and exploration must lead to white colonization, and thus to the replacement of 

the native (whether that means substitution of natives by Whites or the replace-
ment of the native in his “proper” subordinate space, he does not make clear). 

It would be easy to set aside Day’s dismissal of the “negroes’” incapac-

ity for enterprise as stemming from racialized presuppositions that are part 
and parcel of colonial thought. From this perspective, there would be no 
role for the black “native” (if the term is adequate to refer to populations 
made “native” by forced migration and enslavement), except as cheap labor, 
in the economic and social development of colonized territories for which 
geographical exploration was such a cornerstone. The negro, Day claims, 
“will ever be a bad peasant; and nature has unfitted him for anything higher 
in the social scale” (Day 1852:239). The fact, however, is that Day is writing, 
at best, with very little understanding of Dominica or, at worst, with a con-
scious intention of distorting the truth about the realities of island conditions. 
Of previous geographical exploration by the French colonizers who preceded 
the British in Dominica he seems to know nothing. Of the prosperous, eco-
nomically and politically powerful Creole elite (most of them colored) he 
has nothing to say in this context, except perhaps inasmuch as they are the 
“whites” only partially deserving of the title of “civilized.” The independent-
minded peasantry, which from his perspective is superfluous – except to the 
degree that their labor was required for the renewal of the plantation econo-
my after emancipation – must have appeared to him as a considerable threat 
to colonial control. The truth was that in Dominica, Creole and expatriate 
lack of enterprise in populating the interior – the result, for the most part, of 
the obstacles to expansion posed by the often impenetrable mountainous ter-
rain – had left it open to black peasant ownership. 

In Dominica, whose mountainous terrain and poor infrastructure had made 

it a site marginal to the large sugar plantation model that dominated the region’s 
economy, local mulatto families had secured a foothold in the medium-scale 
plantation economy that set the standards for production on the island. As a 
result, it possessed a fairly entrenched Creole middle class. In any case, by 
the time of Day’s visit, those among the more recent English settlers (medical 
officers, government officials, vicars, and tutors) who ventured into planta-
tion agriculture (as did Dr. Nicholls and his mentor, John Imray) did so with 
varying degrees of moderate success, primarily because of unstable access to 
potential workers. As Rolph Trouillot has observed in Peasants and Capital, 
in late nineteenth-century Dominica, “the contradiction between property rela-
tions on the one hand and labor and distribution relations on the other was 
obvious: planters owned the land, but sharecroppers could exploit the low sup-
ply of labor to impose distribution conditions more favorable to themselves” 
(Trouillot 1988:86). The presence of large settlements of free Blacks and 
Mulattoes who owned land or lived as squatters in abandoned estates had pro-
duced an independent-minded peasantry, which included a substantial popula-
tion of Caribs, who had a virtual free rein in the interior of the island and were 

accustomed to negotiating the terms of their employment and the parameters 
of their acceptance or rejection of foreign and local power with greater free-
dom than their counterparts in neighboring islands. This was not a group of 
“natives” – Creole, black, or Carib, peasant or bourgeois – likely to accept 
the passive role imposed on them by these narratives of discovery without an 
attempt at inserting their own versions of events into the tale. 

Nicholls’s original account of their “discovery” becomes the mediating 

text for subsequent essays on visits to the site, and this narrative, as pub-
lished in The Field in 1876, seeks to place the local peasantry in the position 
of an audience so intellectually and courageously (because racially) inferior 
as to reflect the white discoverer’s feat in its proper, superior light. Nicholls 
acknowledges no irony in describing how he had sent two peasants as an 
advance party to open a track through “the primeval forest” – they do so with 
such assurance of the most expedient route to the lake as to take the group 
there almost directly – but disparages as superstitious the very knowledge of 
the local terrain that makes it possible for the group to find the lake by the 
morning of the second day. Given the relatively modest distance traversed, 
and the apparent certainty of imminent arrival, the “expedition” is more akin 
to a party of tourists led by experienced guides.

William Palgrave, who accompanied Nicholls on his third “expedition” 

to the lake in 1877, juggles some torturous rhetoric in dismissing the pos-
sibility of previous native/local awareness of the lake’s existence, only to 
acknowledge that Watt and Nicholls’s 1875 feat was somewhere between a 
“task of verification” and a “discovery.” The ascent to the lake, he concludes, 
“though more than once attempted, had for seventy years at least remained 
unaccomplished”:

Tradition only, speaking through an old French description of the island, 
told of a large and active “soufrière,” nestled amid the highest ranges ... 
But for a century or thereabouts not only had no European succeeded in 
penetrating to this reported wonder; no negro charcoal-burner, however 
familiar with the “bush,” had pushed his rovings to the brink of the sou-
frière; the Caribs ... knew nothing, or at any rate had nothing to say, of the 
lonely region that towered above their abodes. The strong smell of sulphur, 
that when the wind happened to be from the southeast, reached the town of 
Roseau itself, though at a distance of fourteen or fifteen miles in a straight 
line, alone gave witness how huge must be the dimensions, how constant 
the activity of the soufrière whence it proceeded. (Palgrave 1877:367)

This curious passage, which speaks with such authority about the native’s igno-
rance and silence, unveils the assumption that knowledge can only be claimed 
by the existence of a text. Palgrave falls easily into the fallacy of assuming that 
a lack of literacy on the part of the native peasant population precludes the pos-
sibility of knowledge. The assumption had marked colonial thought since the 

earliest writings of the Spanish conquistadores, who privileged the mastery of 
writing as “an unmistakably superior representational technology”:

The unlettered peoples of the New World could not bring the strangers into 
focus; conceptual inadequacy severely impeded, indeed virtually preclude d, 
an accurate perception of the other. The culture that possessed writing could 
accurately represent to itself (and hence strategically manipulate) the cul-
ture without writing, but the reverse was not true. (Greenblatt 1991:11)

Drawing upon Tzvetan Todorov’s work on the rhetoric of the conquest of 
America, Greenblatt wonders if there indeed is “a ‘technology’ of symbolism 
as capable of evolution as the technology of tools,” and whether this indeed 
means that “societies possessing writing are more advanced than societies 
without writing” (Todorov 1984:80). The assumption has entered the rheto-
ric of discovery as a given, providing an a priori rationale for establishing 
and describing relationships between discoverers/colonists and natives. In 
the writings of latter-day discoverers, such as Nicholls’s, the “absence of 
writing” on which these cultural hierarchies were built is conflated with the 
absence of literacy, as if they were identical phenomena and resulted in iden-
tical incapacities for self-representation. 

The Dominican peasantry these discoverers encountered in 1875, how-

ever, did not live in a society marked by the absence of writing. They may 
have been illiterate in a literate society, but they had a working command of 
three languages (French, Kwèyol or local patois, and English) and a rhetori-
cal tradition (which they shared with the local Creole elite) that had mastered 
parody, irony, mockery, and humor as ways of negotiating the subtleties of 
colonial rule. These negotiating strategies required a nuanced understand-
ing of the colonizer’s ways that allowed for veiled scorn and strategically 
deployed sarcasm. Long experienced in navigating colonial relations across 
three languages and in using irony and derision as weapons, they were well 
versed in the verbal artillery required to conduct a ritual of power plays. 
Faced with English colonial supremacy, the native Dominicans, peasant and 
bourgeois alike, struck back by mocking Whites. 

With these rhetorical complexities as background, it is perhaps easier to 

understand the temptation to “silence” the Dominican peasant in the narra-
tive of the discovery and exploration of the lake or to find a discourse the 
local population, peasant as well as bourgeois, did not command – that of 
science. The strategy seems twofold: either the native has nothing to say for 
himself about the existence of the lake, or what he has to say is mere folklore 
that never rises to the category of science. Given the professionalization of 
science that had marked nineteenth-century Europe, “true knowledge” about 
the Boiling Lake was only possible through the writing of scientific or pseu-
doscientific texts. The development of scientific methodology in the century 
before had created a hierarchy of discourses that separated the information 

accessible to the common man from that available to the specialist. Bruno 
Latour, in The Pasteurization of France, uses the history of the laboratory to 
show how the creation of a space designed for isolated experimentation sepa-
rated scientific knowledge from commonplace experience (Latour 1988).

In the laboratory, Latour suggests, “unprecedented things were now to 

be expressed in written signs” (Latour 1988:85) that created a hierarchy of 
its own – formulas, equations, reports that constituted a separate discourse. 
Discovery in the laboratory as well as in the field followed by detailed expli-
cation of the features and uses of the phenomenon discovered was the mark 
of the true scientist. Hence the commodity value of the claim to discovery 
for Dr. Nicholls, who had, after all, been educated as a medical doctor in 
British universities that had trained many of the foremost British scientists 
and explorers of the day and that had followed his writings on the discovery 
of the lake with a number of serious scientific papers on various geological 
and botanical phenomena in the West Indies. Palgrave, a writer with scientific 
pretensions of his own, when forced to question the validity of Nicholls’s 
claim, will turn a critical eye on the latter’s own narrative of discovery, letting 
its own bombastic rhetoric – “they described [the lake] as by far surpassing 
in extent and grandeur anything yet known in the West Indies” – deflate itself 
when made to stand against his debunking of the enterprise as “confirma-
tion” rather than “discovery” (Palgrave 1877:366). But he will still attempt 
to salvage Nicholls’s claim to a discovery of scientific importance. His and 
Watt’s discovery, “though difficult and even dangerous” of access, may not 
be “available to any ends” (i.e., not exploitable comercially), but still remains 
something “of curiosity, perhaps of science” (Palgrave 1877:367). The issue 
of whether knowledge about the lake constitutes science and of who possesses 
and controls that knowledge is central to this discussion. Hence my interest 
in the natives’ unacknowledged knowledge. These narratives that silence the 
native or reduce his utterances to superstition or folklore prompt questions 
such as How much did the native know? And when did he know it?

Bernard Cohn, writing about the conquest of India – a continental conquest 

if there ever was one – describes the importance of securing and disseminating 
“official colonial knowledge” to sustaining the notion of Empire: “the conquest 
of India was a conquest of knowledge ... the vast social world that was India 
had to be classified, categorized and bounded before it could be hierachized” 
(Cohn 1985:283-84). A similar colonial mandate motivates the many visitors 
to the Boiling Lake that followed in the wake of its discovery, but the scale of 
investigation is much narrower, as befits an island-bound enterprise. So here I 
must return to Dominica’s island condition and the likelihood of the peasantry 
not knowing about the existence of the lake before its discovery. 

Nicholls acknowledges no prior information about the lake, other than 

the “intimations” in Watt’s narrative of his rampage through the woods. Day 
speaks of “notions” put forth by “erratic negroes.” Palgrave even denies the 

natives the title of guides, as it presupposes prior knowledge, preferring to 
refer to them as “the carriers of our provisions, hammocks, and so forth,” 
claiming the existence of no track, except what “we” might make for our-
selves (a “we” that does not include the silent bearers who are actually open-
ing a path through the dense tropical forest with their cutlasses). Palgrave can, 
in the same breath, negate any prior knowledge on the part of the natives while 
chastising them for their silence and lack of imagination about the lake: 

I wish that I had some interesting legend to recount connected with the 
spot and for such we curiously inquired, but in vain, from our dusky atten-
dants. No negro, no Carib tradition adds the wonders of imagination to 
those of fact; no story of past demi-god or devil, of nymph or neckar, 
assigns an origin or a history to the Lake ... the Boiling Lake has, for aught 
that we could discover, remained a mere natural phenomenon for Indians 
and Creoles no less than for Europeans; and when ... one of our atten-
dants, turning back, addressed the vaporous gulf with a cabalistic “Salaam-
Aleykum” picked up from some African cousin of Mohammedan origin, 
he gave the first and only expression of superstition aroused by the view. 
(Palgrave 1877:373, 374) 

Palgrave’s disappointed expectations of legends and myths betray his assump-
tion that the Dominican peasant, as a premodern man, would have responded 
to the existence of a Boiling Lake through archaic, nonscientific modes of 
thought and “superstitious” rituals. His rather keen disappointment upon find-
ing that the local peasantry has treated the lake as a “mere natural phenom-
enon” seems only to reduce the peasantry’s own value as a phenomenon whose 
own myths and legends would contribute to the value of the lake’s discovery. 

Surprisingly, Hendrik De Leeuw, upon questioning his guide in the 1920s, 

finds that “many tales and legends have been hatched about this awe-inspiring 
place” (De Leeuw 1937:225). Natives, he explained, feared visiting the place, 
believing that “miserable and vengeful ghosts and evil spirits wander about, 
perpetrating dirty work and nasty tricks.” Other “superstitious natives” would 
leave offerings of food at the lake to appease the mountain spirits and would 
warn visitors that they could be “sucked to the bottom of the cauldron by a 
sudden and irresistible force” as punishment “for presuming to disturb the 
peace of the spirits.” Inquiries about spirits and ghostly apparitions left the 
guide shaking “like an aspen leaf,” twitching about “like a parched pea.” 

Frederick Endlich, for example, writing for the American Naturalist in 

1880, describes a minor volcanic eruption at the lake, presaged by a huge 
dark cloud hovering over Roseau and followed by a rain of fine particles of 
some gray, mineral-like material that covered all foliage and vegetation. He 
juxtaposes in his description the “apprehension” awakened in those believing 
the “mysterious legends as to volcanic activity on the island” with the “cool 
observers, among whom Dr. Nicholls of Roseau was prominent” (Endlich 

1880:766). Describing his expedition to the lake he claims that as his group 
neared the “point of greatest chemical activity” they were deserted by their 
guides – adding that it was “not that their guidance was in the least valu-
able, but [that] we wanted them to carry specimens” (Endlich 1880:765). 
No persuasion or threat availed to make them follow, he claims, since they 
believed that the mountain was inhabited by evil spirits. A refusal to get 
nearer because of an awareness of possible dangers connected to the environ-
ment does not seem to occur to him. However, there is little in the tradition 
of Dominican folk kònts (tales) that would justify such fears relating to the 
Boiling Lake. Among the tales gathered by Gary Ray Smith in his compre-
hensive study of the Dominican oral tradition (1991), only one cautionary 
tale, “The Dangerous Forest,” could be indirectly connected to the dangers 
lurking within a lake such as the Boiling Lake. 

There is, however, a tongue-in-cheek nature to these tales of supersti-

tious natives that forces the reader to wonder – particularly in the absence 
of any such “superstitions” surrounding the lake in Dominican folklore prior 
to the 1875 “discovery” – if they have been invented by the writers, or more 
likely, by savvy guides who understood the value of legend and superstition 
as commodities bound to make the exotic experience of visiting the lake 
more titillating to tourists. There is a performative aspect involved in the 
dramatic “Salaam Aleykum” of Palgrave’s guide that suggests an impromptu 
response to the explorers’ expectations of superstition and legend, an implicit 
understanding that the addition of those elements would increase the touristic 
value of the lake and bring more income to the village of Laudat, from which 
the guides were drawn. Are the explorers, one wonders, having their prover-
bial leg pulled? Have their guides, indeed, invented a tradition of myth and 
legend to satisfy the expectations of foreign visitors?

The possibility of an ironic reading based on the native’s perception of 

the visitors’ expectations – which they could have easily gleaned from the 
Europeans’ inquiries – allows for a more nuanced analysis of these writings 
about the lake’s discovery. Often in these texts, the native’s fears (whether 
real or assumed by the writers) are countered by descriptions of the white 
visitors’ coolness and fearlessness. American geologist Kenneth Earle, 
describing the “terrible spectacle” of the Boiling Lake in his “Geological 
Notes on the Island of Dominica,” describes a small beach at the north end 
of the lake as “accessible to photographers and other venturesome spirits 
– but not to negro guides!” (Earle 1928:182). However, the local guides’ 
“fearfulness” – if seen from their perspective – can be read as understand-
able caution. Most of the guides involved in the increasingly large number 
of visits to the Boiling Lake throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth 
centuries belonged to the Rowle family of Laudat, many of whose members 
had witnessed or been the victims of all the fatal accidents that had taken 
place at that same beach to which they would not venture. When accounts of 

their “fearfulness” are read from their perspective, fear becomes acceptable 
caution and the visitors’ “courage” turns into reckless arrogance. 

In visitors’ texts, the Dominican peasantry’s easy familiarity with nature is 

the only knowledge they are easily granted. When abilities are acknowledged, 
they are physical rather than intellectual. Endlich has little to say in praise of 
the local guides, other than to commend their “climbing quality and endurance” 
(Endlich 1880:796). Likewise Stuart Elliott who, writing in 1951, in awe at his 
guide’s remarkable climbing ability, resorts to comparisons with animals: 

His soles were a half inch thick with callouses and were as tough as a tapir’s 
hide; and his toes, unwarped by any artificiality, were broad and straight 
and widely spread. When he stepped on a slippery rock, his toes curled 
around the edge and gripped almost like the clutch of a bird.2 

A. Hyatt Verrill, in The Book of the West Indies, credits the natives’ superior 
understanding of the physical conditions that makes access to the lake safe 
(he relies on their knowledge of when they would be safe from poisonous 
gases) but falls into delighted surprise when he sees how cleverly the men 
use the lake’s boiling waters and hot steam to prepare their food “in Nature’s 
stove” (Verrill 1917:23). Familiarity is expected, ingenuity is not. 

Frederick Ober, an American naturalist who visited the lake in 1879, is the 

first visitor who grants the Dominicans a voice, thus breaking the peasants’ 
customary silence in these narratives. Proud of being “the first American to 
look upon [the lake] and the first of any nationality to take a photograph,” 
he is also the first to include in his account extended instances of reported 
speech (Ober 1904:333). In his Camps in the Caribbees (1886), he describes 
the “mountaineers” who lead him into the forest in search of rare species of 
birds, as “bronzed as to complexion, and very much mixed up as to ancestry 
..., faithful, honest, untiringly zealous in serving, and as woodsmen ... unsur-
passed” (Ober 1886:67). 

Perhaps Ober’s more democratic American perspective explains the vivid 

presence of the Dominican peasant in his writings, although this presence is 
not without condescension or an understanding that their evident superior-
ity in nature is nonetheless class-bound. His guide to the lake, a Laudat man 
known as Zizi (Jean Baptiste Rowle, Watt and Nicholls’s guide, who some 
years later died by falling into the lake), was the “embodiment of all the serv-
ingman’s virtues,” and had moreover “an overwhelming regard for the white 
man – the white man whom he could respect – who, he said, was next to the 
Bon Dieu. ‘White man he next to God; I thank ze Bon Dieu eef I can speks 
ze Eengleesh’” (Ober 1904:333-34).

2. Stuart E. Elliot, “The Mouth of Hell,” Natural History, December 1951, p. 443.

Ober opens the narrative of his visit to the lake in 1877 by questioning 

the possibility of its remaining undiscovered and unknown until so recently: 
“It seems incredible that in an island with scarce one hundred miles of coast 
line, and containing only three hundred square miles, there could exist not 
only a lake of boiling water, detonating frequently with loud reports, but a 
large area of volcanic activity, without any human being being aware of the 
fact through several centuries” (Ober 1904:336). He, moreover, allows one 
of his “boys,” Joseph Rowle, to tell the story of Watt’s clueless ramble in 
some approximation of his own words:

M’sieu Watt he walk, walk, walk, pour tree day: he lose hees clo’s, hees 
pants cut off; he make nozing pour manger but root; he have no knife, no 
nozing; hees guide was town neegah ... ; zey was town neegah, sah, and 
leab him and loss him. Bien, he come to black man’s ajoupa in wood, an’ 
ze black man sink he jombie an’ he run; when he come back wiz some 
more men for look for jombie M’sieu Watt he make coople of sign – for 
he have loss hees voice and was not to spek – an ’zey deescovair heem. 
(Ober 1886:67-68)

Figure 1. Joseph Rowle and family, Laudat, Dominica, circa 1890 

(courtesy of the American Museum of Natural History)

This version of Watt’s “Lost in the Woods” episode underscores the foolish-
ness and credulity of young Watt as he embarks on his nearly disastrous ramble 
through the dense Dominican tropical forest. Seen from the native peasant’s 
perspective, it would be sheer madness to venture into the forest trusting to 
town people unfamiliar with the terrain, with no knife or cutlass of his own to 
cut through the bush, and with no ability or knowledge to secure anything to 

eat but roots. When he emerges from the forest, traumatized and unrecogniz-
able as a man, he resembles someone who has gone to the other side, who has 
endured a sort of death, a jombie. And in an inversion of the norm in narratives 
of discovery, Watt “goes native” (i.e., he is silenced and needs to communicate 
by “coople of sign”) and the natives must “deescovair” or recognize him. Ober 
may have been charmed by Rowle’s quaintness of language and expression 
into including this first-person narrative into his account, without realizing that 
it represents an almost revolutionary stance. From questioning the possibility 
of the lake having remained undiscovered until 1875 to ridiculing Watt, his 
account reveals a peasant in full command of his rational powers, ready to 
“read” Watt’s behavior in a critical light, expressing his own superior under-
standing of what was required to avoid such an unnecessary adventure.

Similarly, in an 1880 letter to the Royal Geographic Society, G.B. Blanc, 

the island’s Surveyor General, inserts into his description of a recent erup-
tion at Dominica’s Grand Soufrière his second-hand account of the report of 
a team of villagers from Laudat. Here, the villagers’ report is appropriated 
into a scientific account published in one of the premier forums for such 
information in the world. Their narrative reverts to the benefit of the surveyor 
general – to whose reputation as a scientist it contributes – while the peasants 
themselves remain outside the scope of scientific discourse:

 this morning the people of Laudat ... observed that the ridge which divides 
the watershed of the central branches of the Roseau Rives from the north-
ern branch of the Point Mulatre River has almost disappeared ... I sent 
a party of experienced woodmen to ascertain the extent of the country 
destroyed, and they reported that after passing the middle branch of the 
head-waters of the Roseau River, the path ... was completely obliterated ... 
They were obliged to follow the middle branch up, wading knee-deep in 
the soft, sandy ash thrown out by the convulsion ... From the ridge, which 
had considerably fallen in height, away to the east as far as the deep valley 
of the Point Mulatre below the Boiling Lake, was a bare, barren mass of 
debris; not, they say, a standing tree or leaf to be seen ... Whether the lake 
as a lake existed or not they could not tell, as they did not get within a mile 
of it. (Blanc 1880:62, my emphasis)

These accounts, however, are exceptions among the many narratives that 
reduce the native to the role of a silent bearer, a strategy that would be easy to 
attribute to a racist impulse or monolingual arrogance that seeks to impose sci-
entific discourse over superstitious ramblings as the means to assert the social 
and economic hierarchies of colonial societies. But in Dominica in 1875, 
social and economic categories were not so simply defined in terms of black 
and white/English vs. native, as the island had a strong French-derived mulat-
to elite whose recognition of English authority was never unproblematic. For 
Watt and Nicholls, as minor colonial officials, this “discovery” represented an 

opportunity to distinguish themselves among those readers in England who 
could further their careers. It is not that their discovery of the Boiling Lake 
could necessarily lead to territorial expansion or to profitable exploitation, 
but that Nicholls, particularly, recognized the potential career advantages of 
a publicity campaign centered on his discovery of the lake and consequently, 
on his emerging reputation as a scientist. In this he was quite successful – he 
would go on to “discover” the cure for yaws from watching native healing 
practices – and was eventually knighted for his services to the island.

These career-enhancing factors – coupled with Watt and Nicholls’s con-

queror-like arrogance in naming the mountains surrounding the lake after them-
selves (we have, as a result, Morne Nicholls and Morne Watts) – were given 
additional snob value when in 1901 a young Englishman, Wilfrid Meysey 
Clive, a cousin to the Earl of Denbigh and a descendant of Clive of India, died 
of asphyxiation by lethal gases during his visit to the lake. Clive was setting up 
his camera on the very spot from which Ober had taken the first photograph 
of the lake in 1877 when one of his two guides (a man named Wiley) was 
overcome by the fumes and toppled into the water. Clive dispatched the second 
guide to Laudat for help but was himself stricken by the gases and died before 
the rescue party arrived. Ober, writing after his second visit to the Boiling Lake 
in 1903, describes the pathetic scene in the language of romantic tragedy:

Through the wild forest which we had traversed so light-heartedly, over 
the rough trail beneath the giant trees, amid the dense tropic growth, the 
relief party made their return march by night, lighted by torches of gum 
wood, and bearing their ghastly burdens on hammocks between them. 
Years before a similar party had borne to Laudat poor old Zizi, my guide 
and friend, another victim of the Lake, who had scalded to death in its 
waters. (Ober 1904:340-41)

After the Clive tragedy, Nicholls would insert the tale of the young man’s 
death – rewritten as a heroic attempt to save his guide’s life – as a requisite 
element in his own narrative of what had by then become “his” discovery, in 
acknowledgment that the death of this young aristocrat gave the enterprise 
the perfect martyr, one who through his connection to Clive of India would 
enhance the importance and significance of the achievement. For a “native” 
narrative of Clive’s death we have to wait until 1951, when Cyril Rowle, 
grandnephew to Ober’s guide, Zizi, tells the story to Stuart E. Elliott, an 
American visitor. Cyril’s “vivid story,” which Stuart claims had been received 
directly from his grandfather, was that upon their arrival at the lake,

an enormous bubble, which all but covered the entire lake, rose, swelled ... 
and broke into foam, releasing its gases into the air ... Wiley fell where he 
stood, never to move again. Rowle, who happened to stoop down in a slight 
declivity where a rivulet sought the lake, escaped the worst of the gas cloud, 
but he felt a dreadful nausea. Clive scrambled down and stood beside him.

 From Rowle’s account, Clive refused to believe that Wiley was dead. He 
tried to revive him with brandy, while Rowle pleaded with him to leave 
the spot before another bubble should come. However, Clive could not 
grasp the danger, and belittling the warning, he ordered Rowle to return 
to Laudat for medical aid. So bidden, Rowle left, and the last time he saw 
Clive alive, the Englishman was standing with his back against a bank, 
gazing down on Wiley. When, hours later, Rowle returned with the rescue 
party, Clive was still in the same position, looking down at the prostrate 
guide. Clive’s eyes were open but saw nothing. He was dead, and so was 
Wiley.3

Rowle’s account of Clive’s death debunks the latter’s heroism, so central to 
the narrative of English colonial expansion. Clive’s efforts to save his guide – 
proof of British noblesse oblige and selfless heroism – emerge in this version as 
a foolish refusal to heed the warning of his experienced guide, a fatal inability 
to recognize that Wiley was beyond help, and an arrogant use of his authority 
as employer/white man to peremptorily send away his only hope for survival. 
It is “the Other’s” version of history, perhaps as flawed as the one generally 
accepted as truth, but one which underscores the malleability of narrative to 
serve particular interests, such as those of the colonial officials, exemplified by 
Nicholls’s dependence on the lake for relentless self-promotion. 

Nicholls’s “discovery” of the lake, the intense self-promotion that followed 

– and his success in making it serviceable to the advancement of his career and 
income – drew the fire of that very mulatto elite whose political and economic 
power rivaled that of the British authorities. There were manifest political ten-
sions between Dominica’s colonial bureaucracy and this Creole elite of French 
descent, two fairly distinct groups whose differences went beyond language 
and social patterns and spilled into the dominant political debates of the perio d 
(see Paravisini-Gebert 1999). The Creole elite dominated the Legislative 
Council and used its strength to counter the British administration at every pos-
sible turn. It was most successful in keeping out of the Council those among 
the recent English settlers they perceived as conservative in political, social, 
and racial matters, despite the power open to them as members of the colonial 
administration. Such was the case with Nicholls, a conservative in all mat-
ters important to the Creole elite, who failed at numerous attempts at election 
despite a thriving medical practice and promotion to Chief Medical Officer. 

Nicholls, in turn, was lionized by the expatriate community in Dominica 

and neighboring islands, coming to be known as the “Uncrowned King of 
Dominica” (Menzies 1926:203).4 To the annoyance of Dominica’s Creole 
elite, British residents and visitors sung the praises of Sir Henry Nicholls for 

3. Stuart E. Elliot, “The Mouth of Hell,” Natural History, December 1951, p. 476.
4. J.H. Menzies, “The Uncrowned King of Dominica,” United Empire, no. 17, 1926, p. 
203.

his “unremitting efforts and zeal for his Empire and Dominica” (De Leeuw 
1937:226). Hendrik De Leeuw, visiting Dominica after Dr. Nicholls’s death 
in 1926, wrote of Sir Henry as having arrived in Dominica “at a time when 
the planters again were going to rack and ruin, and the peasants, who were on 
the point of starvation, were abandoning their work to go to more prosperous 
neighboring islands” (De Leeuw 1937:219). De Leeuw’s rewriting of history 
credited Dr. Nicholls with almost single-handedly restoring the Dominican 
economy through his introduction and encouragement of the cultivation 
of limes, the island’s chief crop throughout most of the twentieth century. 
Quoting his English sources, he described Dr. Nicholls as “the Joshua who 
led the people of Dominica into the Promised Land” (De Leeuw 1937:219). 

Nicholls’s career, however, was emblematic of how, “even when coloniz-

ers surround themselves with the persuasive scenery of possession and rule, 
the gaps between projection and performance are frequently betrayed by the 
anxieties of their texts, which reveal the gestural character of efforts to gov-
ern, sanitize, convert and reform” (Thomas 1994:16). Nicholls was the poster 
boy for the successful colonial official: he had gathered honors in his profes-
sion, had been knighted, had run a moderately successful plantation where he 
conducted his botanical experiments, had been widely published in journals 
devoted to colonial medicine and science, had raised a prosperous large family 
after his marriage to the daughter of a rich Creole, he had been lionized by his 
peers for his accomplishments. Yet the recognition of his local society eluded 
him – it was, in fact, consistently and consciously denied in an act of sustained 
resistance to what he represented as a colonial officer of conservative notions.

Nowhere had this been clearer than in the Creole elite’s response to the 

discovery of the lake. The editors of the Dial, the newspaper of the Creole/
mulatto middle class, had greeted the news of the feat with undisguised scorn, 
repeatedly claiming that early map makers and local hunters had known of its 
existence for a century or more before Nicholls’s visit. It is true enough that the 
Grand Soufrière area and the Valley of Desolation of which the lake is the cen-
terpiece appear in earlier descriptions of the island, although whether they refer 
to the lake as a specific feature of that landscape is not always clear. Thomas 
Atwood’s 1791 book, The History of the Island of Dominica, offers the follow-
ing description of the Valley of Desolation in a tone of awe markedly different 
from the scientific/discovery rhetoric of almost a century later:

These sulphureous mountains are certainly among the most wonderful 
phenomena of nature, and command our astonishment and admiration. To 
see vast tracks of land on fire, whose smoke, like clouds, stretched far 
around; brimstone in flames, like streams of water issuing from the sides of 
precipices; in the vallies large holes full of bituminous matter, boiling and 
bubbling like a cauldron; the earth trembling under the tread, and bursting 
out with loud explosions, are objects truly terrific to the beholder s; who, 

on the spot, are struck with awe and admiration, on viewing such dreadful 
works of the Almighty, who causes them to exist, for purposes only known 
to him. (Atwood 1931:78)

Atwood’s detailed description of the area surrounding the lake was cited often 
by Nicholls’s political enemies as proof of the emptiness of his claim to have 
discovered the lake. Nicholls would also seek to validate his claim by allud-
ing to a seventeenth-century legend related to “a Lake of Fire somewhere in 
Dominica’s interior never visited by a white man” (De Leeuw 1937:220). 
According to this legend, there existed in the neighborhood of this Lake of 
Fire, at a distance of two or three hours from Roseau, a monstrous serpent 
with “a jewel the size of a carbuncle embedded in its head” that illuminated 
the forest for miles around. The legend is reported to have lured Nicholls 
and Watts into the forest, leaving the populace sitting on pins and needles for 
three days, until they emerged “with the startling news that they had discov-
ered the legendary lake, a boiling one at that – and thus closed a romantic 
episode in the history of Dominica” (De Leeuw 1937:220). 

The lake’s “discovery” served as the focus of an intense political debate 

that did not abate until Nicholls’s death and had less to do with the lake itself 
and more with the tensions between local native knowledge and its commodi-
fication abroad for the benefit of a white colonial elite bent on using scien-
tific/discovery enterprises to enhance their status with both the colonial and 
colonized societies. In nineteenth-century Dominica the Creole merchant and 
planter class was forever ready with a contestatory discourse which used irony 
as its principal weapon, as we can see in the following passages, taken from 
a 1887 response to yet one more article by Nicholls flaunting the discovery. 
They convey not only the mulatto elite’s case against Nicholls’s claim of dis-
covery (still going strong twelve years after the fact), but also the importance 
of the issues at stake in the Dial’s repeated attempts to discredit Nicholls:

How Dr. Nicholls can claim to be the discoverer of the Boiling Lake of 
Dominica with Mr. Watt’s “Lost in the Woods” still legible in the introduc-
tion to one of the Old Dominica Almanacs?, and how, with the Boiling Lake 
marked on an old map of the island, and with Dr. Clarke’s [sic] reference 
to this “most wonderful phenomenon” in 1797, either of the two soi-disant 
Columbuses can unblushingly lay claim to having discovered the Boiling 
Lake is an enigma we do not pretend to solve.5

The three documents cited here are of particular interest, not only because 
they support the Creole elite’s contention that Nicholls’s discovery of the lake 
represented an appropriation of knowledge already claimed by others, but 
because the sources were closely allied to the French-derived Creole elite 

5. “Windward News,” Dominica Dial, May, 7 1887, p. 2.

and not to British colonial representatives, and could thus be claimed as local 
knowledge. Watt, he of the hysterical scramble through the woods, had grown 
up in Dominica and was connected to many Creole families. Hence the arti-
cle’s willingness to give him and his text, “Lost in the Woods,”6 primacy as 
the preferred report on the discovery over Nicholls’s own essay in The Field. 

The claim to the lake’s being marked on “an old map” could refer to any 

of a handful of extant maps displaying unnamed features that could be identi-
fied as the Boiling Lake: Archibald Campbell’s “Sketch of the Coast” (1761), 
the earliest published map of the island by Emanuel Bowen (1745), the maps 
by LeRouge of the 1778 French survey of the island, and those by Thomas 
Jefferys (1775), Thomas Bowen (1778), Thompson (1814), the Society for 
the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge (1835), and George Phillip & Son (1856). 
They offer evidence of fairly comprehensive surveys dating back to 1745, 
making it impossible to contend the assertion that Dr. Nicholls’s “discovery” 
constituted the first visit to the area by native or European.

Of greater importance in the Creole elite’s arsenal against Nicholls’s claim 

is a book by James Clark, a physician who spent a number of years working in 
Dominica (1771-1788, 1789-1796, and 1804-1818) researching the incidence 
and treatment for yellow fever, typhus fever, dysentery, malaria, dry belly-
ache, cholera, and tetanus. In A Treatise on the Yellow Fever as It Appeared 
in the Island of Dominica (1797), Clark analyzes the hot baths at Soufrière 
and makes reference to the “most wonderful phenomenon” in the Valley of 
Desolation. As only one of two books written about Dominica in the eighteenth 
century, before the island was ceded to the English by the French – the other 
being Atwood’s History of the Island of Dominica (1791) – Clark’s account 
bears the additional authority of his outstanding reputation as a scientist. Being 
that Clark’s work was the most comprehensive medical treatise on Dominica to 
that date, critics of Nicholls’s questioned whether the newly appointed superin-
tendent of hospitals could have been unaware of the book’s existence or unfa-
miliar with its contents, particularly since a lengthy synopsis of the book had 
appeared in Clark’s 1797 work. In 1880, reporting on a recent volcanic erup-
tion in Dominica to the Royal Geographic Society, Mr. G.E. Blanc, Surveyor-
General of the island and a member of the colonial elite, assured his readers 
that “the Boiling Lake was visited for the first time, in this generation, five 
years ago; but its existence was known of a century previously, as it is referred 
to in a work by one Dr. Clarke, F.R.S., dated 1777” (Blanc 1880:366).

To the evidence against Dr. Nicholls’ claim, as outlined in the preceding, 

the editors of the Dial add a heavy dose of sarcasm and what amounts to 
public repudiation:

6. Watt’s “Lost in the Woods” had appeared in a local publication, The Dominica 
Almanac.

But if Dr. Nicholls is able to prove himself the discoverer of the Boiling 
Lake then an ungrateful world should hasten to christen this lake locus fer-
vidus Columbi Nicholii, in recognition of the talented explorer who about 
the same time tried hard to get our woodsmen to change the name of one 
of their familiar mountains to Morne Nicholls and if the real Dr. Nicholls 
would only drown himself in the phenomenon and not reappear, Phoenix-
like, from his own bouillon, this part of the world would be saved much of 
that kind of fustian writing about this island with which the little doctor’s 
article winds up.7

The editors of the Dial would heap further scorn on Nicholls and Watts 
by reminding readers that the mountains they had named after themselves 
were quite appropriate in their shape as Morne Watts was “tall and thin” and 
Morne Nicholls was “short and squat.” Compared to the sarcasm displayed 
by the Dial, the lightly sprinkled irony that flows over Sterns-Fadelle’s 
description of Watt’s and Nicholls’s feat with manifest gusto in The Boiling 
Lake of Dominica (1902) must have been read as almost flattering. Writing 
twenty-eight years after the discovery, Sterns-Fadelle, a Creole of French 
descent, educated at the University of Paris, demonstrates the persistence 
of the campaign against Nicholls, which can only be explained as necessary 
to the continued struggle to disenfranchise the British colonials of which he 
was a salient representative. His feat of discovering the Boiling Lake – as 
later his claim to have discovered the cure for yaws – had left him vulnerable 
to persistent attacks through which the Creole elite sought continuously to 
rebuff the full extent of English control. The mulatto-controlled Dominican 
liberal press, through its ideological struggle, opened a contestatory space that 
was both political and proto-literary. The Dial’s main weapons to counter its 
opposition were wit, irony, and satire – deployed through impassioned argu-
ment and mordant commentary and inviting public participation through letters 
to the editor (see Paravisini-Gebert 1996). 

Nicholls’s appropriating gestures – the “discovery,” the poetic raptures, the 

naming of mountains after himself – were easy targets for his enemies’ satire 
precisely because they were not his intended audience, which was “at home” 
in England. The contestatory role belonged to those “in place,” in a position 
(as his English readers were not) of having access to the landscape and being 
able to measure the gap between the prose and the reality it purporte d to 
reflect. The gap was broad enough for Nicholls’s credibilit y to be nullified 
and for his claim to discovery (i.e., possession, however abstract given the 
lake’s untouchability) to be openly challenged, a challenge symboli c of the 
Creole elite’s refusal to accept British control without a struggle.

Bolstering the Creole elite’s relentless mockery of Nicholls is the belief 

that discoveries such as that of the Boiling Lake, whether they privilege 

7. “Windward News,” Dominica Dial, May, 7 1887, p. 2.

scientifi c discourse or sentimental rapture at the island’s natural wonders, 
usurp local knowledge through publication and dissemination abroad – and 
generally serve to reinforce colonial power relationships and racial hierar-
chies. In the case of nineteenth-century Dominica, however, a society with 
a wealthy and politically independent local elite and a savvy and moder-
ately empowered peasant class, those attempts at colonial appropriation of 
knowledge through scientific enterprise or the traveler’s gaze generate the 
discourse of resistance evident in the Dial and in the peasantry’s counter-
narratives of discovery, which allows the natives, who have long possessed 
the knowledge others claim to have unveiled, to use irony and parody to 
ridicule the colonizers’ pretensions and destabilize their power.

It is fair to say that the efforts of the Dominican Creole elite to subvert and 

contest colonial control succeeded in many ways precisely because Dominica 
was a small island of relatively little importance in the Imperial scheme. Its 
colonial officials never had the advantage of a strong military establishment 
to uphold their pretense to power, nor were they able to sustain control with-
out continuous negotiations with the well-established Creole elite bent on 
recovering its entirety-of-itself and a peasantry which, given the availability 
of abandoned estates, had to be coerced away from subsistence agriculture 
to work on estates. The type of colonialism that emerges in Dominica in the 
last quarter of the nineteenth century, as a result, is more akin to a negoti-
ated truce in which the hierarchies of colonial control become malleable and 
flexible. The perennial struggle for control manifested itself through myriad 
compromises and uneasy pacts that reflected the fluidity of colonial rela-
tions in a tiny outpost of the Empire. Of the many forms of imperialism pos-
sible, Dominica forged its own through continued adaptation to local events 
and circumstances – of which the discovery of the Boiling Lake is but one. 
Dominica’s version of colonialism is drawn from its insularity. An island – a 
small island at that – it found its insularity to be its best defense.

REfEREnCEs

aTWOOd, THOMas, 1931. The History of the Island of Dominica. London: Cass. [Orig. 
1791.]

bELL, HEskETH, 1946. Glimpses of a Governor’s Life: From Diaries, Letters and 
Memoranda. London: Sampson Low, Marston & Co.

bLanC, G.E., 1880. Recent Volcanic Eruption at the Grand Soufriere, in the Island 
of Dominica. Proceedings of the Royal Geographic Society and Monthly Record of 
Geography 2(6):363-66.

CaMEROn, vERnEy LOvETT, 1877. Across Africa. London: Daldy, Isbiter & Co.

CLaRk, JaMEs, 1797. A Treatise on the Yellow Fever as It Appeared in the Island of 
Dominica in the Years 1793-4-5. London: J. Murray & S. Highley.

COHn, bERnaRd, 1985. The Command of Language and the Language of Command. In 
R. Guha (ed.), Subaltern Studies IV. Delhi: Oxford University Press, pp. 276–329.

daRWin, CHaRLEs, 1839. Journal of Researches into the Geology and Natural History of 
the Various Countries Visited by H.M.S. Beagle, Under the Command of Captain Fitzroy, 
R.N., from 1832 to 1836. London: H. Colburn.

day, CHaRLEs WiLLiaM, 1852. Five Years’ Residence in the West Indies. London: 
Colburn & Co.

dE LEEUW, HEndRik, 1937. Crossroads of the Buccaneers. Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott.

dOnnE, JOHn, 1623. Devotions upon Emergent Occasions, and Severall Steps in My 
Sickness. London: Printed by A.M. for Thomas Jones.

EaRLE, kEnnETH, 1928. Geological Notes on the Island of Dominica. Geological 
Magazine 65(4):182-83.

ELiOT, EdWaRd CaRLyOn, 1938. Broken Atoms. London: Geoffrey Bles.

EndLiCH, fREdERiCk M., 1880. The Island of Dominica. American Naturalist 14(11): 
761-72.

fROUdE, JaMEs anTHOny, 1888. The English in the West Indies; or, The Bow of Ulysses. 
London: Longmans.

GREEnbLaTT, sTEPHEn, 1991. Marvelous Possessions: The Wonder of the New World. 
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

HOnyCHURCH, LEnnOx, 1984. The Dominica Story: A History of the Island. Roseau: 
Dominica Institute.

—, 1991. Dominica: Isle of Adventure. Basingstoke, U.K.: Macmillan.

LaTOUR, bRUnO, 1988. The Pasteurization of France. Cambridge MA: Harvard Univer-
sity Press.

niCHOLLs, HEnRy aLfREd aLfORd, 1880. The Fourth Report of the Medical Super-
intendent of Yaws Hospital. London: London: Waterlow & Sons. 

—, 1894. Report on Yaws in Tobago, Grenada, St Vincent, St Lucia and the Leeward 
Islands: Addressed to Her Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for the Colonies. Lon-
don: HMSO.

ObER, fREdERiCk a., 1886. Camps in the Caribbees: The Adventures of a Naturalist in 
the Lesser Antilles. Boston: Lee & Shepard.

—, 1904. Our West Indian Neighbors. New York: James Pott & Co.

PaLGRavE, WiLLiaM, 1877. West Indian Memories: The Lesser Antilles and the “Boiling 
Lake.” MacMillan’s Magazine 35(209):366-74. 

PaRavisini-GEbERT, LizabETH, 1996. Phyllis Shand Allfrey: A Caribbean Life. New 
Brunswick NJ: Rutgers University Press. 

—, 1999. A Forgotten Outpost of Empire: Social History in Dominica and the Creative 
Imagination. Jean Rhys Review 10(2):13-26.

PETERs, ELizabETH, 1985. The Mummy Case. New York: Congdon & Weed.

savORy, ELainE, 1998. Jean Rhys. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

sMiTH, bERnaRd, 1985. European Vision and the South Pacific. New Haven CT: Yale 
University Press. 

sMiTH, GaRy Ray, 1991. The Dominican Kont: An Analysis of Folktales and Storytelling 
on a Caribbean Island. Ph.D. Dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.

sTERns-fadELLE, F., 1902. The Boiling Lake of Dominica: A Historical and Descriptive 
Account of a Unique Phenomenon. Roseau: Dominica Office.

THOMas, niCHOLas, 1994. Colonialism’s Culture: Anthropology, Travel and Government. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

TOdOROv, zvETan, 1984. The Conquest of America: The Question of the Other. Trans. 
Richard Howard. New York: Harper & Row.

TROUiLLOT, MiCHEL-ROLPH, 1988. Peasants and Capital: Dominica in the World 
Economy. Baltimore MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press.

vERRiLL, a. HyaTT, 1917. The Book of the West Indies. New York: Dutton.

WHiTEHEad, nEiL L., 1995. The Historical Anthropology of Text: The Interpretation of 
Ralegh’s Discoverie of Guiana. Current Anthropology 36(1):53-74.

LizabETH PaRavisini-GEbERT
Randolph Distinguished Professor Chair
Vassar College
Poughkeepsie NY 12604, U.S.A.
<liparavisini@vassar.edu>

MaRy TURnER

TWO ATTORNEYS AND AN OVERSEER

Plantation Jamaica 1750-1850: Capital and Control in a Colonial Economy. 
b.W. HiGMan. Kingston: University of the West Indies Press, 2005. xiv + 386 
pp. (Cloth US$ 65.00)

Mastery, Tyranny, and Desire: Thomas Thistlewood and His Slaves in the 
Anglo-Jamaican World. TREvOR bURnaRd. Chapel Hill: University of North 
Carolina Press, 2004. xii +320 pp. (Cloth US$ 45.00, Paper US$ 21.95)

These two works from differing perspectives add significant new layers to 
our knowledge of plantation management in the Caribbean. Both focus on 
Jamaica, Higman straddling the pre- and postemancipation period (1750-1850) 
and dealing with the attorneys (i.e. agents, managers) who administered estates 
for absentee proprietors, and Burnard depicting in unique detail the life of an 
overseer, right-hand man for attorneys and resident planters alike, and his rise 
to landed proprietorship. The books usefully complement one another.

Attorneys and “great” attorneys were significant in Jamaican development 

because from about 1740 sugar profits increasingly enabled planters to return 
to Britain if they wished to do so. The debate about their positive and nega-
tive qualities began among contemporaries then and has rumbled on through 
Caribbean historiography since Frank W. Pitman (1917) and Lowell J. Ragatz 
(1927) identified absentee proprietorship and its corollary, management by 
agents, as a key British West Indian problem. It was seen as promoting care-
less, cruel, and extravagant management and leaving estates in the real con-
trol of overseers. These judgments were first queried in a seminal article by 
Douglas Hall (1964) which pointed out that absenteeism had promoted the 
emergence of professional estate managers and concluded that without further 
careful research generalizations were likely to prove indefensible.

 Higman re-opens the debate, investigates evidence from an impressively 

varied range of primary and secondary sources and presents his findings 
in a comprehensive overview (Book 1) complemented by two case studies 
(Book 2) based on published attorney-proprietor correspondence of attorneys 

at work pre- and postemancipation, Sir Simon Taylor (1765 -1775) at Golden 
Grove and Isaac Jackson (1839-1843) at Montpelier.

His findings lead him to conclude firstly that the managerial class which 

emerged in the wake of absenteeism was well trained and efficient and con-
stituted an elite of professional planters. These men gradually took over from 
the managers appointed by the first waves of absentees who were, character-
istically, fellow proprietors, merchants, relatives, or friends. 

Secondly, Higman establishes that the professional attorneys were typi-

cally men who arrived as young white immigrants, often Scottish, from var-
ied educational backgrounds and worked their way up the plantation man-
agement hierarchy, accumulating knowledge and skills as bookkeepers and 
overseers before taking over as the proprietors’ representative. They were 
planters by profession, a meritocracy in no way inferior to or less efficient 
than resident proprietors. In 1832 when emancipation loomed, this elite num-
bered just 200 men who were in charge of 745 properties, characteristically 
larger than those belonging to residents. Their holdings included more than 
50 percent of the sugar estates (some with associated pens) and they super-
vised more than 45 percent of Jamaica’s slaves.

Thirdly, Higman resolves the vexing question of just how “great” the 

“great” attorneys were. Most attorneys managed just one property for one 
employer. Some 25 percent, however, had charge of five or more proper-
ties and worked for multiple employers; Higman ranks these as “great.” The 
single most outstanding figure in 1832 was William Miller on Jamaica’s 
northwest sugar belt; known as the “Attorney-General,” his responsibili-
ties included 26 sugar estates and 7,700 slaves belonging to 22 absentees. 
Statistics are firmest post-1817 (when Slave Registration became obliga-
tory), but evidence suggests that in earlier decades, when more estates were 
operational and attorneys fewer, Miller was outclassed by men with as many 
as 49 sugar estates and 13,000 slaves.

Higman elaborates these findings with maps and commentaries that 

define geographically the extent of “great” planter domains and the rounds 
they rode, link attorneys and employers, and establish interattorney linkages 
and networks. All this, embedded in a wealth of supportive evidence, cre-
ates a new historical relief map of Jamaica with differentiated densities of 
attorney control superimposed on estates, pens, and plantations and on the 
slave population. It will prove an invaluable tool for further research.  
 
The attorneys at work (Book 2) illustrate shifts that took place in the 

profession and in labor relations across the period. Taylor, heir to the for-
tune amassed by his immigrant father, was a typical mid-eighteenth-century 
appointee employed by a personal friend and paid the customary 6 percent 
commission on the crop produced. He had wide decision-making powers – 
limited chiefly by his employer’s control of capital expenditures and the legal 
obligation, imposed by resident owners in the Jamaican Assembly (1740) – 

267
REviEW aRTiCLE

on attorneys to provide yearly statements regarding the total produce of the 
estates for which they were responsible, sworn on oath for the public record 
to protect the interest of absentee proprietors. 

Attorney professionalism was shaped by proprietor-attorney common 

concern to maximize profits. Taylor’s employer, like most absentees, was 
reluctant to increase Golden Grove’s labor force (reduced from 540 in his 
father’s time to 369). Taylor consequently made sure that the overseers he 
hired and fired worked the slaves on the “pushing” system. As a result the 
acreage cultivated by every slave rose from 1 to 1.5 acres and hogsheads of 
sugar rose from 1 per slave to 1.3. Taylor’s letters to his employer meanwhile 
eloquently expounded his humanitarian views on slave management.

Isaac Jackson (1839-43) was a typical nineteenth-century meritocracy 

man, an immigrant who rose through the ranks and by 1830 officially com-
bined the roles of attorney and overseer for a sugar estate. This joint function 
together with payment by salary, a common practice by the 1820s, suggests 
that absentees adjusted to reduced profit margins by securing attorneys at a 
fixed rate and increasing their responsibilities. 

These adjustments rather pale into insignificance when compared to the 

labor-management power shift that characterized emancipation. Employed (at 
£600 a year) by Lord Seaford (pillar of the West India Interest in Parliament) 
at Montpelier, Jackson, with labor in short supply, faced workers free to nego-
tiate hours, wages, and rents and free to back up demands by strike action and 
threats. At the same time every unoccupied scrap of land sprouted ground pro-
visions and he was forced to fence off estate pasture to keep out the workers’ 
livestock and horses. Jackson – professional, persistent, hard-working – did 
his best to keep things going but strongly advised Seaford to follow the British 
Guiana example and import Indian contract workers at lower wages, though 
without success. Sugar production went down steadily to 1843.

Higman’s wide-ranging discussion is a pleasure to read – a pleasure 

enhanced by the outstanding quality of the publication itself. He makes a per-
suasive case for the professionalism of the planting attorneys and the extent 
of their influence and their activities. Like all good investigative history, 
however, it provokes questions. Can we altogether accept this reassessment 
without complementary studies of resident planters? And the sheer scale of 
the “great” attorneys’ operations, their 6 percent commissions on profit, and 
Taylor’s Golden Grove on the “pushing” system unavoidably recall the accu-
sations made at the beginning of the debate: that the common interest of 
absentees, attorneys, and by extension overseers primarily in crop production 
made for a cruel system in which overseers were responsible for flogging the 
work out of the slaves. 

The attorneys’ pre-emancipation success in delivering profits and maxi-

mizing commission earnings was dependent on lower management ruthless-
ness. 

Overseers, however, tend to be marginal in the literature and appear only 

sporadically in attorney-proprietor correspondence. The 36-volume diary 
of Thomas Thistlewood, 17 years an overseer, 20 years a small proprietor, 
which chronicle his daily life (1750-1786) are therefore uniquely important.

Brought to public view initially by Douglas Hall (1989) they are com-

prehensively analyzed and contextualized here by Trevor Burnard. His book 
is a rich, densely informative study of mid-eighteenth-century society on 
Jamaica’s developing sugar frontier in Westmoreland, more than half of 
which concerns slave-management relations.

Thistlewood, son of a Lincolnshire tenant farmer, tried his hand at trading 

ventures, including a two-year voyage to India and Brazil. But at twenty-
nine, he had failed to find a footing in England. In Jamaica he had choices. 
Employed first as a pen keeper (40 slaves at £50 p.a.) by a prominent resident 
planter (Florentius Vassall), he moved up the plantation hierarchy to a sugar 
estate called Egypt (90 slaves at £60 p.a.), owned by another resident planter, 
and remained there (one year excepted) until 1767 when he achieved his 
original goal and became, not an attorney, but a small proprietor.

Thistlewood the slave manager rapidly emerges in Burnard’s pages as a 

true professional. After observing his proprietor employer giving three hun-
dred lashes to a delinquent driver, he established his authority at Vineyard 
Pen by whipping half the women and two-thirds of the men in the year he 
was there. On agroindustrial Egypt, work conditions were harder and relent-
less whipping (50-150 lashes) continued, elaborated for repeat offenders by 
imposing iron collars and chains.

Thistlewood targeted runaways in particular. Short-term (2-3 day) absen-

tees disrupted work routines and required two more slaves to bring them 
back; long-term runaways, more seriously, undermined owner/overseer 
authority and threatened brigandage. Once captured both categories were 
severely punished either by being whipped and having pepper rubbed in their 
wounds, or being covered in molasses and buried for ants to attack. More 
generally disruptive were the “starving times” regularly induced by provi-
sion crop failures. Slaves caught eating young canes and diminishing crop 
prospects were severely flogged. 

And worse followed: slaves died of malnutrition or ate cassava roots in 

desperation as a way of poisoning themselves. In these circumstances, in order 
to deter cane eating Thistlewood added to his existing terrorist techniques by 
inventing Derby’s dose (one slave defecated in another’s mouth), adminis-
tered occasionally from January to August 1756. His recourse, seen here as a 
reflection of individual character, is rather an example of human proclivities 
inevitably encouraged by conditions that are socially sanctioned (if only in a 
laboratory) to exercise unlimited personal power where the victims are with-
out redress. Thistlewood was arguably an average product of a vile system. 

269
REviEW aRTiCLE

Customarily established brutalities characterized his regime at Egypt. As his 
slaves expressed it, he was “no For Play” (p. 255) – he demanded respect.

Thistlewood exacted sexual services as well as work from slave women 

– usually more than once a day. He was careful, however, not to engage with 
women attached to élite workers, in particular gang drivers, on whose coop-
eration he depended to maintain work routines. He respected their property 
rights to particular women while exercising his own property rights over 
the rest – though at times acknowledging by payments and gifts that he had 
enjoyed an extra service.

Burnard’s twenty-first-century critique of Thistlewood’s conduct, while 

unexceptional in itself, rather underestimates the force of well-established 
Jamaican sexual mores on an individual who – in contrast to the Moravian 
missionaries in neighboring St. Elizabeth – was not committed to changing 
them. Jamaican mores, in any case, also sanctioned informal semiperma-
nent arrangements which Whites with sufficient means often established – as 
Thistlewood and Sir Simon Taylor did – with slave women as their house-
keepers. And if Thistlewood had the “unnatural and bestial longings of a 
quintessential sexual predator” how does one characterize Lord Byron?

Thistlewood’s “housekeeper” Phibbah, a strong-minded country-born 

slave (who had her own history of sexual encounters) emerges as a char-
acter in her own right. Shrewd, with a network of connections among the 
slaves, she became Thistlewood’s working partner whose influence extended 
beyond the household they established. Burnard’s study lends a new dimen-
sion to our knowledge of women in her position.

The interface of slave manager-slave worker relations is one of the most 

interesting aspects of this book. Despot Thistlewood had a close if contentious 
relationship with his African confidential servant, Lincoln (the first slave he 
purchased), taught slaves to fish, loaned out guns, led them in border wars to 
prevent slaves from neighboring plantations from robbing provision and fish-
ing grounds. Most importantly, perhaps, he paid attention to slave health and 
compiled a collection of sixty recipes found useful for this purpose.

Undercurrents of tension, however, were always there. In his early days at 

Egypt, Thistlewood confronted and fought a runaway while his slaves stood 
by, waiting to see who would win before helping him out. He overheard them 
plotting his murder and found one “serviceable” woman in his bed with a knife. 
His nephew, sent out to train in planting, drowned when hunting alone in the 
swamp in ambiguous circumstances, having (against all advice) taken over the 
gang driver’s woman. And when slave rebellion broke out in May 1760, at first 
defeating the militia, and then spreading to the neighboring estate, Thistlewood 
took a risk and armed his slaves. Fortunately for him the military rapidly gained 
the upper hand, depriving the slaves of the opportunity to murder him. 

Slave manager Thistlewood had intellectual interests; he arrived in 

Jamaica with almost one hundred books and a commission agent in London 

supplied new ones. He had wide interests – science, mathematics, history, 
horticulture, and philosophy – and built up a circle of professional men and 
small planters who exchanged books and discussed them with one another.

To become a small proprietor he built up a twenty-seven-strong slave 

jobbing gang, investing shrewdly in a period of rising slave prices, mostly in 
young African men and women. In 1767 he moved with them and Phibbah 
(whose owner still insisted on collecting £18 a year for her) to Breadnut 
Island Pen (66 acres of dry land and 78 acres of swamp), where he raised 
cattle, goats, and small stock, renting out slaves at harvest and planting. The 
move improved his social status and allowed him to apply his horticultural 
knowledge and (perhaps following Voltaire’s advice) plant a garden which 
became a showpiece of tropical botany. As both manager and proprietor, 
however, his fortunes rested on slave labor.

Burnard deals thematically with all aspects of Thistlewood’s life, bring-

ing sound judgment and sound scholarship to locate him convincingly in 
the Anglo-Jamaican world of his time. Readers might demur at the repeated 
identification of Thistlewood as a sadist. He was, arguably, just a conformist 
getting on with his life in a slave society and becoming, as Burnard puts it “a 
vital cog” in “an oppressive order” (p. 5).

REfEREnCEs

HaLL, dOUGLas, 1964. Absentee Proprietorship in the British West Indies to about 1850. 
Jamaica Historical Review 4:15-35.

—, 1989. In Miserable Slavery: Thomas Thistlewood in Jamaica, 1750-86. London: 
MacMillan.

PiTMan, fRank W., 1917. The Development of the British West Indies, 1700-63. New 
Haven CT: Yale University Press.

RaGaTz, LOWELL J., 1928. The Fall of the Planter Class in the British Caribbean, 1763-
1833. New York: American Historical Association.

MaRy TURnER
Institute of Commonwealth Studies 
University of London 
London WC1B 5DS, U.K. 
<Mary.Turner@sas.ac.uk>

BOOK REVIEWS

Travels with Tooy: History, Memory, and the African American Imagination. 
RiCHaRd PRiCE. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008. xiv + 452 pp. 
(Paper US$ 24.00)

PETER REdfiELd
Department of Anthropology
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill NC 27599-3115, U.S.A.
<redfield@unc.edu>

Ethnography has proved a flexible form over the course of the twentieth cen-
tury, not only in its presentation, but also in the range and depth of research 
that it reflects. Despite official invocation of ideals of extended engagement, 
relatively few ethnographers have produced truly long-term studies of particu-
lar groups or communities, even before moving out of villages. And although 
collaborative approaches enjoy a current vogue amid discussions of method in 
contemporary American anthropology, the conception of collaboration tends 
to focus on present interest and political claims rather than longer historical 
or cosmological trajectory. Richard Price’s latest offering, Travels with Tooy, 
is thus a doubly rare and precious thing: the product of extended, histori-
cally minded engagement with a people and their worldview, simultaneously 
cast in a collaborative mode. Featuring Price’s multifaceted (and multisited) 
encounters with a Saramaka wise man and healer, it is intensely personal in 
terms of both subject and mode of exposition, as well as rich in scholarly 
detail. The author’s commitment to his interlocutor remains palpable on every 
page, matched only by an equal concern for academic rigor.

Such a level of engagement stems directly from a lifetime of study. For 

some four decades Richard Price has faithfully returned to visit Saramaka 
Maroons, first in Suriname, and later, following political conflict and sub-
sequent migration by members of the group, in French Guiana. Although 
thus geographically anchored, the products of this research (authored both 
individually and jointly with Sally Price) have been strikingly wide-ranging 
in terms of topic, conceptual approach, and narrative form. Travels with Tooy 
is no exception; the text manages to be classically ethnographic and experi-
mental at one and the same time. The work contains a treasure trove of mate-

rial related to Saramaka cosmology and esoteric language, all of lasting value 
in the archival sense to both specialists and the Saramaka themselves. At the 
same time it illustrates the actual practice of this knowledge by concentrat-
ing on the experiences of one óbia-man named Tooy. In presenting his story, 
Price emphasizes that it is neither unique nor typical, but rather exemplary. 
Moreover, Tooy is a close friend, in the complicated sense of a distinct, chal-
lenging equal, rather than the breezy American euphemism for a pleasant 
acquaintance. Even as Tooy shares his work with Price the anthropologist, he 
incorporates him into it, treating him in a parallel role as assistant. As noted 
in a prelude discussion of authorship (pp. viii-ix), however, though their lives 
may intertwine, they maintain separate spheres of expertise. In the end it is 
up to Tooy to prescribe treatments and to Price to write a book.

The complexities of relationship between the protagonists are apparent 

from the start. Rather than French Guiana or Suriname, Price’s adopted home-
town in Martinique serves as an initial narrative stage, when the author helps 
broker an attempted healing by Tooy for a Martiniquan businessman. Arriving 
by plane to consult with this client, the healer stays at the anthropologist’s 
house and enlists his aid as a translator in performing the initial rituals. But 
the anthropologist is already deeply involved, connected by extensive vil-
lage ties to the businessman, by a lifetime of study to the Saramaka, and by 
long-standing interest to the subject matter. Although the moment may appear 
extraordinary, as the work continues it grows clear that this is but a minor 
amplification of Tooy’s usual practice in French Guiana. There, a BMW or 
Mercedes can easily park by his modest shack at the outskirts of Cayenne, its 
occupant drawn by promised relief from a personal problem, and following a 
chain of connections, beliefs, and recommendations that lead to this door. 

In following and describing Tooy’s vocation, Price traces many roots and 

tendrils, from a page of a grimoire worn by a Saramaka soldier in World War 
II to the multiple plants and gods that infuse this particular óbia-man’s prac-
tice. It is here that the book most obviously rests on decades of cumulative 
research, as Price refers to an almost dizzying array of names, events, and 
story fragments, sorting them into the vast and ever-shifting puzzle of cos-
mology that informs Tooy’s consultations. Moving back and forth between 
exposition and synthesis, the author allows the reader to share in moments 
of discovery and realization as well as suggesting underlying patterns. Most 
critically, perhaps, what emerges is an intricate and partial map, one that 
suggests both the full measure of his protagonist’s knowledge and simultane-
ously how many gaps and loose ends remain for them both. No individual, 
not even a master practitioner like Tooy or a lifelong student like Price, can 
quite claim the whole. Nonetheless, they can certainly master a great deal, as 
both the healer’s practice and the anthropologist’s book attest. 

In between Tooy’s ritual performances, Price recounts other aspects of 

his subject’s life: his political standing in the Saramaka community; a recon-

struction of his chronology; and his everyday relations with family members 
and friends. However dedicated to knowing gods, spirits, songs, and stories, 
the healer is very much a worldly man in a Saramaka way, renowned for 
his sexual appetites. Amid the pantheon surrounding Tooy is a troublesome 
spirit known as Frenchwoman. Despite warnings from his matrilineage, he 
fails to come to terms with this spirit before finding himself the subject of a 
court case, charged with rape from an encounter many years earlier with an 
underage partner. The ensuing trial, in which Price becomes involved both 
as a friend and as a cultural authority, is alternately fascinating and disturb-
ing, a mix of minor tragedy and farce in a late colonial context. As Price (p. 
177) summarizes, “This is not a pretty story and it has no heroes.” In the 
event Saramaka understandings of sexuality prove incommensurable with 
those of French law, and Tooy is convicted. The same state that intervenes 
to punish him, however, ultimately saves his life by diagnosing him with a 
heart condition and providing medical treatment. Tooy is eventually released 
from prison on medical grounds, and resumes both his practice and efforts 
to achieve full recognition as a Saramaka political leader. After chronicling 
this dramatic moment, Price likewise returns to his cosmological explora-
tions, offering a summation and comparison with other Caribbean religions, 
appropriately entitled “Reflections from the Verandah.” 

All said Travels with Tooy is a supremely rich and ambitious text. An 

unapologetic display of serious scholarship, chockablock with careful eth-
nographic and historical detail, it nonetheless breaks with classic conven-
tions by highlighting personal experience and interweaving multiple threads. 
Fortunately the writing remains engaging throughout, and the many chapter 
and section breaks allow the reader to move in nonlinear fashion to check 
and retrace connections. Although the book lacks an index, it has an exten-
sive coda detailing the esoteric language it references (with audio files acces-
sible at http://www.press.uchicago.edu/books/price/), as well as a helpful list 
of dramatis personae. But ultimately the work stays true to the classic eth-
nographic challenge of presenting another worldview: this is Tooy’s story, 
and to follow it we must travel along. It is deeply appropriate, as well as 
heartening, that Travels with Tooy has won the 2008 Victor Turner Prize for 
Ethnographic Writing.

Eric Williams and the Making of the Modern Caribbean. COLin a. PaLMER. 
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2006. xii + 354 pp. (Cloth 
US$ 34.95)

anTHOny P. MainGOT
Department of Sociology (Emeritus)
Florida International University
Miami FL 33317, U.S.A.
<Anthony.Maingot@fiu.edu>

British historian E.H. Carr always warned his students to study the historian 
before they began studying the historian’s presentation of the “facts.” In a 
way, Carr had adopted this methodological stricture from his nineteenth-cen-
tury compatriot, Herbert Butterfield, who warned that one should be aware 
of the big difference between “history” written after the facts and “history” 
written as events were unfolding. How very important, but also how very 
difficult both strictures are for anyone attempting to record the career of Eric 
E. Williams, the Caribbean’s politician cum historian par excellence. The 
story of this Trinidadian man of words and of action can be said to have 
started with the writing of his Ph.D. thesis at Oxford and its publication in 
1944 as the path-breaking Capitalism and Slavery, to have continued with 
The History of the Peoples of Trinidad and Tobago, written in the heat of the 
1961 electoral campaign and move to independence, and his premature auto-
biography, Inward Hunger (1969); and to have ended in 1970 with his mag-
isterial From Columbus to Castro. Never, during that extraordinary stretch of 
time, was it ever evident that Williams did anything other than write history 
as explanation and as guide to his all-consuming interest in politics.

It is evident, therefore, that it would take a person with highly developed 

analytical insights into the dramatis personae as well as mastery of long 
stretches of local and regional history to produce something original. Some 
half dozen attempts at biography were already on the shelf. Was there really 
a call, let alone an intellectual need, for yet another portrait of Williams the 
politician? Colin Palmer’s deliberate decision not to write another biography 
was a felicitous one. His was a more complicated plan: to elucidate Williams’s 
activities on the larger Caribbean stage by tracing what he calls the “dialec-
tical relationship” between his domestic imperatives and his political posi-
tions – those taken on his own initiative and those cast upon him. Needless 
to say, writing this sort of history in such a way as to produce something 
original and relevant to our times required a wide array of multidisciplinary 
skills. Palmer’s fine-honed insights into human nature and more specifically 
into Williams’s own complex personality, his knowledge of the Trinidadian 

and wider Caribbean context, and, crucially, his dexterity and knowledge of 
archival research all contribute to his success. He is the first to have accessed 
whole batches of official sources on the man and his times in London and 
Washington. Palmer begins the story in 1956 with the electoral victory of 
Williams’s political creation, the Peoples National Movement (PNM) and 
ends it in 1970, when the Black Power rebellion came close to destroying 
everything Williams had created. It was an era in which both the nation state 
and the region were roiling in the turbulent seas of decolonization. Palmer’s 
chapter on the struggle with the United States over the World War II antisub-
marine base, Chaguaramas, helps focus the decolonization battle in its wider 
(i.e., not simply British colonial) dimension. His analysis of the dissolution 
of the West Indies Federation and the failure to create a unitary state with 
Grenada is simply first rate. 

Palmer is equally enlightening when showing that even as Williams 

was crossing swords with the British and the Americans, he had to confront 
something that, although not of his making, was a problem he often did 
much to exacerbate: the racial and communal question that had long divided 
Trinidad (and British Guiana) but which had now reached a boiling point. 
Even as he was excoriating the Indo-Trinidadians for speaking of “Mother 
India,” Williams was attempting to solidify his Afro-Trinidadian base by a 
prolonged tour of West African nations. In both cases the attempts at a pri-
mordial link were shown to be nothing if not wishful thinking. The historical 
connection between West Africa and the West Indies, Williams told some 
university students upon his return, “is nothing to be ashamed about, though 
the West Indians don’t like it and I get the feeling that the West Africans like 
it even less” (p. 235). From then on he seemed to be governed by the old 
Trinidadian saying, “You have to grow where you are planted” – not an easy 
sell in a society so divided. Any student of ethnonationalism will benefit 
from reading this study of the intractability of nation-building when one side 
sees the nationalist movement as little more than an attempt at forcefully 
imposing racial and cultural homogeneity. Palmer is masterful in describing 
the thrust and parry of racial campaigning followed by contrite attempts at 
amends only half-heartedly accepted. It is sad but true that the society was 
more ethnically divided when the “father of the nation” passed away in 1971 
than it had been when he began his politics in 1954.

Where Palmer’s approach leaves some unfortunate informational lacunae is 

in his final discussion of the 1970 Black Power riot and the mutiny of the mili-
tary Regiment. The nearly total dependence on British and American diplomat-
ic dispatches proved to be inadequate to the task of unraveling so complex an 
affair. As much of Palmer’s previous scholarship shows, he is aware that there 
exist ample published scholarly eye-witness accounts of that dramatic period. 
Those accounts could, and should, have complemented the archival documen-
tation he used. That said, however, Palmer has given us a terrific read which 

will surely stand the test of time amidst the many other studies on the life and 
times of this fascinating but complex personality which are sure to follow.

REfEREnCEs

WiLLiaMs, ERiC E., 1962. The History of the Peoples of Trinidad and Tobago. London: 
Andre Deutsch.

—, 1969. Inward Hunger: The Education of a Prime Minister. London: Andre Deutsch.

—, 1970. From Columbus to Castro: The History of the Caribbean, 1492-1969. London: 
Andre Deutsch.

—, 1994. Capitalism and Slavery. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. [Orig. 
1944.]

Nation & Citizen in the Dominican Republic, 1880-1916. TEREsiTa 
MaRTínEz-vERGnE. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2005. 
xviii + 235 pp. (Paper US$ 24.95)

saMUEL MaRTínEz
Department of Anthropology
University of Connecticut
Storrs CT Unit 2176 06269, U.S.A.
<samuel.martinez@uconn.edu>

Thoroughly researched, and imaginatively and subtly interpreted, Nation & 
Citizen in the Dominican Republic, 1880-1916 is a must-read for students 
of Dominican history and society. It also merits close reading by students 
of Latin American and Caribbean politics, historians of gender, and students 
of feminist research methods. Those who know the literature on Dominican 
history may be surprised by what little salience Martínez-Vergne accords to 
processes that loom as giant developments in other historians’ accounts of 
this period. The definitive entry of the Dominican Republic into the United 
States’ neoimperial orbit and the rise of large-scale sugar producers to eco-
nomic and political dominance are topics dispatched in a page or two in 
Nation & Citizen. Rather than dwell on these obviously momentous shifts, 
Martínez-Vergne devotes page after page to minute concerns of daily gover-
nance of the capital city of Santo Domingo and the eastern sugar port city of 

San Pedro de Macorís. Minutes regarding trash disposal problems and court 
records of property and interpersonal disputes and on cases of petty thievery 
and drunken and disorderly public behavior, on the one hand, and idealistic 
initiatives to build a modern infrastructure and institutions of education, civic 
life, healthcare and hygiene, on the other hand, and perhaps above all, memo-
randa of the constant and, it seems, often frustrated efforts to police and 
regulate the daily lives of these cities’ poorer denizens – these are the main 
sources from which Nation & Citizen builds its picture of urban life.

Rather than being mainly about the development of a sense of nationa l 

identity in the Dominican Republic, as its title might suggest, the book makes 
an argument, not so easily pigeonholed into trendy categories of analysis, that 
the Dominican political landscape of the period witnessed an inchoate and 
short-lived blossoming of ideals of liberal, participatory democracy. While 
Martínez-Vergne disclaims any intention of debunking earlier accounts, 
this argument may look surprising to scholars who think of this period in 
Dominican history as the era of the caudillo, when governments were sus-
tained and changed by the rifle rather than the ballot box. 

Not surprisingly, Martínez-Vergne’s emphasis on the ascendance of lib-

eral ideals is most persuasive with regard to elite visions of a future of ever-
expanding enlightenment and progress. She makes a notable contribution to 
Dominicanist history especially by analyzing the way patriarchal conjugal 
and family ideology resolved the contradiction between liberal meritocratic 
ideals and the exclusion of women (even those of education, property, and 
respectable family backgrounds) from political office and full enfranchise-
ment as citizens.

She hits shaky ground when she asserts that working people, in seek-

ing to enlist the support of state agents for their own ends, acted upon both 
a new subjective sense of themselves as “citizens” with “rights” and tacitly 
validated the state’s authority as an impartial arbiter of rights claims. She is 
at times judiciously ambivalent in putting forward this argument, duly taking 
note of the dismal opinion that the Dominican elite held of the abilities and 
habits of their lower-income co-urbanites. Ambivalence gives way to confu-
sion, however, when Martínez-Vergne makes claims that seem diametrically 
opposed; at one point she writes that the working class of Santo Domingo 
and San Pedro “act[ed] precisely as the intelligentsia had envisioned an active 
citizenry” (p. 155), but elsewhere states that “seemingly everywhere, the work-
ing class posed a threat to the renovation of the nation” (p. 127). While her 
argument, that the working class actively sought incorporation in the project of 
liberal governance, is worthy of serious consideration, it rests on sources that 
are simply too sketchy and uninformative to sustain sweeping generalizations 
about the subjectivities of the urban proletarian and artisanal classes. Based on 
the evidence she provides, it is not clear, for example, what plaintiffs in inter-
personal disputes, lumped by the authorities under the heading of escándalos 

(scandal or disorder), had in mind when they approached the police for assis-
tance. Were they asserting “rights,” as Martínez-Vergne claims? Or were they 
acting out of an injured sense of “honor” or “decency”? In soliciting the aid of 
the authorities, were these people making an implicit claim to “citizenship” or 
positioning themselves as dependent clients of the police officers, bureaucrats, 
and politicians whose help they sought? Many other such questions could be 
raised. The larger point is that Martínez-Vergne does her own case no favor by 
giving short shrift to the other models of politics that might viably explain her 
evidence. Her argument, that an inchoate cross-class consensus was emerging 
around principles of liberal governance, might have been strengthened had 
she made a sustained effort to reconcile or contrast this fin-de-siècle vision of 
the Dominican future with the “caudillist” politics that Dominicanist scholars 
widely understand to have held sway during this period. 

It is therefore telling that at one point Martínez-Vergne writes that “work-

ing men and women were asking the government ... to validate their ‘rights,’ 
although they may not have used that word” (p. 160, my italics). Especially 
in a historical context in which the terms “citizenship” and “rights” might 
have been new or even alien to many working-class Dominicans, the mean-
ings of their actions are not as transparent as Martínez wishes us to think. At 
the book’s end, I am left hungry for more evidence to sustain, refute, or, more 
likely, complicate the depiction of the working-class politics of “scandal” and 
“honor” that Nation & Citizen so innovatively if only partially illuminates.

Tuning Out Blackness: Race and Nation in the History of Puerto Rican 
Television. yEidy M. RivERO. Durham NC: Duke University Press, 2005. 
xii + 264 pp. (Paper US$ 21.95)

JOssianna aRROyO
Department of Spanish and Portuguese
University of Texas
Austin TX 78712, U.S.A.
<jarroyo@mail.utexas.edu>

Yeidy M. Rivero points out that in spite of Puerto Rico’s political relation-
ship with the United States, the representation of blackness on Puerto Rican 
television has been defined through a complex range of relationships, dia-
logues, and the re-articulation of local, Caribbean, and Latin American con-
texts. In addition to contributing to the historicizing of these relations, her 

essay includes an analysis of racism and the ethnic frontiers in Puerto Rican 
television. Understanding the complexities of the representation of blackness 
in Puerto Rican television goes beyond the deconstruction of discourses of 
“racial democracy” Puerto Rican style that have developed around myths 
such as “racism doesn’t exist,” “everybody is mixed,” or “talking about race 
or racism merely imitates intellectual discourse in the United States.” Rivero 
historicizes the key moments of these representations in the period 1940-
1990 and she closes with an epilogue in which she discusses the dilemmas 
of local Puerto Rican television when confronted by the supremacy of huge 
corporations such as Univisión-Puerto Rico, based in the United States.

The first chapter, “Caribbean Negritos: Ramón Rivero, Blackface and 

Black Voice in Puerto Rico,” focuses on the artistic trajectory of the famous 
comedian Ramón del Rivero (Diplo) and his use of “blackface” in Puerto 
Rican theater and television, making the connection clear between Cuban 
teatro bufo (1860s, a genre whose influence can be traced back to the Spanish 
Golden Age) and the “blackface” of the Puerto Rican author. The influence 
of what Rivero, following critic César Salgado, calls “Cubarican” socio-
cultural expression is central for her argument, since she goes fully into a 
“transnational” consensus of the representation of race in both countries. 

These alliances clearly occurred in popular culture (Diplo saw the mask for 

the first time on Cuban comedian Leopoldo Fernández), and as Rivero points 
out, they strengthened with the Vanguard movements and cultural and liter-
ary negrismo (négritude) as in the poetry of Palés Matos and Nicolás Guillén. 
During those years, Fernando Ortíz was already the director of the “Sociedad de 
Estudios Afrocubanos” (Society of Afro-Cuban Studies) where Tomás Blanco 
presented his conference “Racial Prejudice in Puerto Rico.” The allusion made 
to a particular discourse on race and racism that was being articulated in simi-
lar modes on both Hispanic Caribbean islands indicates that the radicalism and 
the complexity of Diplo’s black mask goes beyond a mere copy of the scripts 
and accent from Havana. It is a trans-Caribbean mask that represents – “from 
the top” and “from the bottom” – a series of discourses and social, cultural, and 
political issues. In the transition to television the radicalism of the scripts was 
transformed, making way after the death of Ramón del Rivero to other repre-
sentations in “blackface,” such as Paquito Cordero’s character “Reguerete” 
(1965, La taberna India) and the Negrito “Doroteo” by Tino Acosta (1960), 
that lose the social and political cleverness of Diplo’s characters. 

Chapter 2, “Bringing the Soul: Afros, Black Empowerment and the 

Resurgent Popularity of Blackface,” analyzes the 1970s in Puerto Rico and a 
more politicized discourse on racism in the mass media. Political and social 
alliances created by Puerto Ricans in the diaspora with African Americans 
in cities such as New York and Chicago are central to understanding the 
sociocultural and political debates about race. Rivero highlights the found-
ing of the “Young Lords,” the Puerto Rican chapter of the Black Panthers in 

Chicago, and the visit of Stokely Carmichael to Puerto Rico and his meeting 
with Juan Mari Brás, the leader of the Puerto Rican Socialist Party. 

The first part of this chapter presents several interviews, photos, and 

images of variety shows, from the beginning of Lucecita Benitez’s career as 
a singer of the nueva ola (new wave) until the moment of her political radi-
calization. Rivero points out that this can be seen at a musical level on her 
record Raza pura (1971) in which the singer interprets songs with a radical 
political edge, and at a visual level, in the singer’s choice to transform her hair 
to an Afro style and to dress in a masculine manner. These gestures forced her 
out of local television for a number of years, although it gave her a degree of 
international fame: Lucecita won the Festival OTI in México in 1969, singing 
“Génesis” dressed in a blue gabardine suit and donning an Afro. 

Rivero points out that discussions of race also touch on issues of gen-

der and sexuality and analyzes Lucecita’s polemic Afro in that intersection. 
Ironically, local programming closely followed musical shows in which 
African-American “soul” styles were the fashion, and Rivero mentions the 
Boricua version of Soul Train with Carol Myles and Melín Falú, the latter 
with a U.S.-style Afro. The second part of this chapter concentrates on the 
victory of Wilnelia Merced in the “Miss Mundo” contest and the reaction 
of the press. Rivero argues that Merced’s victory revealed the ambiguity of 
racial categories in Puerto Rico. If for some journalists Wilnelia was trigueña 
(brown-skinned), for others her skin color was due to the “strength of the 
tropical sun” rather than her racial origin. 

Chapters 3 and 4, “The CubaRican Space Revisited” and “Mi familia: 

A Black Puerto Rican Televisual Family,” concentrate on comedies of the 
1980s and 1990s. Rivero explores the importance of the presence of Cuban 
screenwriters such as Manuel Montero “Membrillo” and Felipe San Pedro for 
the production of comedies on local television. The world of Latin American 
soap operas owes a large debt to scripts for Cuban radio soap operas such as 
El derecho de nacer (The right to be born) written by Delia Fiallo, and Puerto 
Rican comedies also reflect the influence of Cuban scripts and comedies that 
arrived on the island before 1959. After the Revolution of 1959 and with the 
emigration of Cubans dedicated to media-related work, producers, directors, 
and scriptwriters went on to form part of the mass media of Puerto Rico. 

If, as José Cobas and Jorge Duany (1997) point out, an anti-Cuban dis-

course against the new emigrants began in the 1960s (“Cubans are right-
wing,” “they always talk about Cuba,” “they think they are better than Puerto 
Ricans,” etc.), scriptwriters such as Manuel Montero “Membrillo” repre-
sented these issues in television comedies, interrogating, deconstructing, and 
redoing many of these stereotypes. The comedy Los suegros (The in-laws) is 
a clear example of these “ethnic” and “international” borders in Puerto Rican 
television. Rivero analyzes the scripts of several episodes to trace the interac-
tion between the Puerto Rican and Cuban families, and at the same time, to 

show how they reacted to Kathy, the character from the United States. The 
quality of the scripts created a conflict between Montero and various sectors 
of the Cuban community in Puerto Rico who considered that he was not 
“anti-Fidel” and did not have a “clear” political commitment to Cuba. One 
of the contributions of this chapter is the elaboration of this “Cuba-Rican” 
border in social, political, and cultural arenas. It also makes clear that the 
Cuban community in Puerto Rico since the 1960s has been as heterogeneous 
in its political visions as it is today in any part of the world.

 Chapter 4 deals with the popular series Mi familia, starring Otilio 

Warrington (Bizcocho) and the late Judith Pizarro, highlighting the puer-
torriqueñidad represented by the characters that created a “de-racialized” 
image – one of the show’s initial proposals. Rivero analyzes which of these 
instances are positive and negative vis-à-vis that “de-racialized” image, 
while underlining its importance and popularity on Puerto Rican television. 
He points out that the comedy was a workshop for many black Puerto Rican 
actors, and contrary to other African-American series, it wasn’t necessarily 
focused on upper- or middle-class black families. After the chain Univisión 
purchased Channel 11 and turned it into Univisión-Puerto Rico in 2001, 
many local programs disappeared. Mi familia was canceled in 2003. 

The book’s “Coda” discusses the social, cultural, and political implica-

tions of the control that conglomerates now hold over programming in Puerto 
Rico and Latin America more generally. If Puerto Rican television has not 
been a mere “copy” of programs from the United States or Latin America 
but rather a creative and dialogical expression of local contexts and spaces, 
what are the repercussions of programming that does not speak about local or 
national debates and racial, ethnic, and sociopolitical borders? Due to pres-
sure from the large U.S. television chains, numerous Puerto Rican actors now 
live in Mexico, Miami, or Los Angeles to participate in this market. Making 
the jump from the local to the U.S. “pan-Latino” representations is equiva-
lent to the creation of new languages of interpretation that, contrary to spaces 
such as the Cubanorriqueño (of a pan-Caribbean nature), make reference to 
postnational and globalized contexts. Are positive results possible or is local 
Puerto Rican television a colonial victim of the “equalizing” and “commodify-
ing” currents of globalization? Rivero does not answer all of these questions, 
although she does emphasize that the products, actors, and creations of local 
television need to be defended and that there is a sense of urgency for academ-
ics on the island and in the United States to make these debates visible.

REfEREnCE

CObas, JOsé a. & JORGE dUany, 1997. Cubans in Puerto Rico: Ethnic Economy and 
Cultural Identity. Gainesville: University Press of Florida.

Slave Ship Sailors and Their Captive Cargoes, 1730-1807. EMMa CHRis-
TOPHER. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006. xviii + 241 pp. 
(Paper US$ 21.99)

EdWaRd E. andREWs
Department of History
University of New Hampshire
Durham NH 03824, U.S.A.
<edwarda@unh.edu>

Slave Ship Sailors and Their Captive Cargoes, 1730-1807 is Emma Chris-
to pher’s ambitious attempt to fill a significant gap in the historical literature 
on the eighteenth-century transatlantic slave trade. While historians have 
rightfully focused on either the statistical significance of the trade or African 
slaves’ suffering within it, no study has thoroughly examined the role of 
the thousands of sailing men (and some women) who made the transatlan-
tic slave trade possible. Christopher makes careful use of sailors’ journals, 
Admiralty Court records, newspaper reports, and other printed material to 
build on the scholarship of W. Jeffrey Bolster, Marcus Rediker, and others 
(see, for example, Bolster 1997, Rediker 1987, and Linebaugh & Rediker 
2000). In doing so, she tells a compelling story about sailors who demanded 
their own liberty while they kept others in chains.

The book is divided into two sections of three chapters each. Christopher 

first traces why slave ship sailors took up the task, acknowledging that it 
entailed poor pay, hazardous working conditions, and little chance of eco-
nomic improvement (even as the well-connected slaving captains could 
make fortunes off the trade). These sailors were often “crimped” into service, 
through methods that could involve trickery, bribery, and even outright force. 
The second chapter examines the multiracial makeup of slave ship voyages. 
Though there might have been more on the women or Asian lascars involved 
in the slave trade, this chapter effectively contradicts the assumption that 
only white sailors carried black slaves. The section ends with a gruesomely 
disturbing chapter on the brutality and violence that characterized a slaving 
voyage. Herein lies the central paradox of sailors’ experiences: while they 
were often targets of the captain’s cat-o-nine-tails, slave ship sailors could 
just as easily turn that vicious whip onto their captive cargo.

Section 2 begins by following slave ship sailors’ prolonged visitations to 

West Africa, either as convicts in British prisons, runaways seeking refuge, 
or womanizers looking for a good time. In fact, Christopher is at her best 
when discussing the sexual interactions between slavers and African women. 
Invoking Orlando Patterson’s idea that slavery is best understood as a pro-

cess, she also suggests that slave ship sailors were the crucial mechanism 
whereby African captives were commoditized during the Middle Passage into 
African slaves (through the use of violence, subjugation, and then cleaning). 
The book ends with a detailed examination of the conditions that these sailors 
faced once in the West Indies. While they were necessary for the slave trade, 
ships that took less risky cargo from the Caribbean had no need for slave ship 
sailors, making the skills they learned during the Middle Passage virtually 
obsolete once slaves were sold on land. Stuck on the islands, they often main-
tained close friendships with slaves and free Blacks, making the local elite 
increasingly uneasy about alliances that cut through both race and class. 

As fascinating as this text is, Slave Ship Sailors also leaves many ques-

tions unanswered. First, Christopher claims that the unique situation of 
slave ship sailors put them at the forefront of the fight for freedom in the 
eighteenth-century Atlantic. Their close proximity to African slaves obvi-
ously gave them a point of comparison from which to draw rhetorical energy. 
Sailors thus used their unique position of being close to slavery, but not actu-
ally in it, to resist unfair wages and nasty working conditions. This argument 
is not as clearly developed as it might have been, as Christopher could have 
used more examples to examine how sailors’ individual fights for freedom 
had wider implications throughout the Atlantic world. Another problem is 
the issue of chronology. The title claims that the period from 1730 to 1807 
will be covered, but the book never explains why these dates were chosen. 
Readers are left to assume that Christopher chooses 1730 because that was 
when British slave trading intensified. The official conclusion of British 
involvement in that trade, 1807, is an obvious ending point. Between these 
two dates, however, there is no sense of historical development or change. 
Did slave ship sailors’ lives get better or worse over time? How was the 
nature of slave ship sailing transformed as a result of Atlantic revolutions? 
Perhaps most importantly, how did the end of the slave trade affect these 
poor seamen’s lives? Did this momentous event represent for them a golden 
opportunity or a financial disaster? While Christopher does an admirable job 
of tracing sailors’ journeys throughout the space of the Atlantic world, she 
seems less concerned with charting their historical changes through time. 

This book nevertheless makes an important contribution by investigating 

an aspect of the slave trade that historians have too often neglected. Though 
it will probably not catalyze a paradigm shift in our understanding of slav-
ery, maritime culture, or the Atlantic world (in fact, when Christopher cites 
historians, she often does so to support her own interpretation rather than to 
disagree with them), this was not the intention of the work in the first place. 
Instead, the text fills an important gap, examining the sailors who served as 
cogs in the massive wheel of the transatlantic slave trade. As Christopher 
reminds us, to ignore these Sons of Neptune is to misunderstand the central 

role that slaving seamen played in the construction of racial slavery, transat-
lantic commerce, and ideologies of freedom. 

REfEREnCEs

bOLsTER, W. JEffREy, 1997. Black Jacks: African-American Seamen in the Age of Sail. 
Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.

LinEbaUGH, PETER & MaRCUs REdikER (eds.), 2000. The Many-Headed Hydra: 
Sailors, Slaves, Commoners, and the Hidden History of the Revolutionary Atlantic. 
Boston: Beacon Press.

REdikER, MaRCUs, 1987. Between the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea: Merchant Seamen, 
Pirates, and the Anglo-American Maritime World. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.

Scotland, the Caribbean and the Atlantic World, 1750-1820. dOUGLas J. 
HaMiLTOn. Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2005. xv + 249 pp. 
(Cloth £55.00)

niCHOLas Canny
Department of History
National University of Ireland, Galway
Galway, Ireland 
<nicholas.canny@nuigalway.ie> 

This is by any standards an excellent first book. Like that genre it car-
ries some of the marks of the Ph.D. dissertation from which it derives, but 
Douglas Hamilton brings a coherent argument to the forefront and usefully 
points to sources and questions that warrant further research. Like previous 
authors who have identified Scottish involvement with the West Indies as 
an important subject of study, Hamilton estimates the number of Scots who 
might have migrated to the West Indies over the course of the seventeenth 
and eighteenth centuries, but he parts company with his predecessors (nota-
bly Alan Karras, Trevor Burnard, and Bernard Bailyn) both in suggesting a 
higher total than any of them allow for (almost 21,000 in place of the previ-
ous highest estimate of 17,000), and in arguing that it was the quality and 
capability of the Scots, rather than their number, which rendered their pres-
ence in the Caribbean important, especially during the eighteenth century. 

Hamilton shows that throughout these two centuries there were always 

some people in Scotland, driven more by want and social dislocation than by 
the spirit of adventure, who saw the possibility of making good in the Americas. 
However he finds that Scots could take but scant advantage of the better oppor-
tunities that this region presented until they were enabled by the Act of Union 
of 1707 between England and Scotland to engage as equals with their English 
counterparts in trade and colonization in the Atlantic. Thus, he concludes that 
after the events of 1707, Scots who would make their careers or fortunes over-
seas looked increasingly westward rather than, as previously, to the Baltic 
regions of continental Europe, and to the province of Ulster in Ireland. As they 
sought after opportunity in the Caribbean, Scots found that little was available 
on islands that had long been in British possession, and they therefore concen-
trated on islands that were only then being developed by the British (notably 
Jamaica), or those that came into British possession at the conclusion of the 
various treaties that ended the sequence of wars fought during the late seven-
teenth and eighteenth centuries in Europe and on the Atlantic. Thus, again, as 
Hamilton portrays it, politics determined where in the Caribbean Scots would 
make their most enduring impression, while domestic political configurations 
determined which Scots gained access to the patronage networks in Britain that 
determined who might purchase estates or procure appointment to civil and 
military positions in the British islands of the Caribbean.

Those of most interest to Hamilton are those who became members of 

the emerging colonial elites on the islands of Jamaica, Dominica, Grenada, 
St. Vincent, and Tobago. He has much to say also of the Scots whose educa-
tional attainments at home qualified them to hold positions as bookkeepers, 
financial managers, lawyers, doctors, merchants, clerks, and ship captains in 
the businesses associated with the various Caribbean islands on which Scots 
became a significant, or even a dominant element, and from which they estab-
lished transcolonial networks extending from Demerara to Berbice to Florida. 
Hamilton gives special attention to the “clannishness” of the Scots, whether 
of Highland or Lowland origin, but more compelling is what he has to say 
of the progress made by Scottish merchant houses in advancing themselves 
in English port towns, notably Bristol and London. Most interesting is his 
account of the great Scottish trading house of Houstoun & Co., whose rise 
he attributes to its application in the Caribbean of the store system associated 
with the tobacco trade in the Chesapeake, and whose fall he attributes to its 
practice of investing its profits in British land that could not be easily liqui-
dated to deal with the financial crises that arose at moments of uncertainty.

This brief summary will convey some impression of the original explora-

tions and findings in Scotland, the Caribbean and the Atlantic World, while 
the bibliography, and especially the detailed list of manuscript sources that 
shed light on the Scots in the Caribbean, means that this book will be the 
essential starting point for future scholars working on any aspect of British 

trade and settlement in the Caribbean. My only regret is that Hamilton has 
failed to use his sources more fully to reconstruct the quotidian experiences 
of a few exemplars of the Scottish community in the Caribbean, which also 
would have enabled him to give more attention to Scottish, as opposed to 
English, responses to the inhumane work regimes with which traders and 
planters in the Caribbean were necessarily associated.

The British Atlantic Trading Community, 1760-1810: Men, Women, and the 
Distribution of Goods. sHERRyLLynnE HaGGERTy. Leiden (the Netherlands): 
Brill Academic Publishers, 2006. xiv + 287 pp. (Cloth US$ 120.00)

A Deus ex Machina Revisited: Atlantic Colonial Trade and European Economic 
Development. P.C. EMMER, O. PéTRE-GREnOUiLLEaU & J.v. ROiTMan 
(eds.). Leiden (the Netherlands): Brill Academic Publishers, 2006. xxx + 358 
pp. (Cloth US$ 134.00)

RUssELL R. MEnaRd
Department of History
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis MN 55455, U.S.A.
<menard@hist.umn.edu>

After taking the field of Early Modern history by storm in the 1980s and 
1990s, the notion of Atlantic history seems to be losing its luster. The two 
books under review illustrate different aspects of Atlantic history’s difficul-
ties. One of the attractions of the idea that the Atlantic World should be stud-
ied as a unit is the notion that Atlantic trade, especially trade with colonies 
in the Americas, played an essential role in Europe’s economic development, 
especially in its industrialization. The essays in A Deus ex Machina, first 
presented at a conference at the University of Lorient in France in September 
2001, interrogate the connection between colonial trade and European devel-
opment and conclude that the idea has little merit. While this is a longstand-
ing subject among Early Modernists and the conclusion is hardly new, the 
volume does make some unique contributions to a central debate in the field 
of Atlantic history. Usually, this debate has focused on Britain in the years 
between 1500 and 1800. A Deus ex Machina considers the impact of colonial 
trade on Spain, Portugal, France, the Netherlands, Denmark, and Sweden as 
well as Britain and extends the analysis into the nineteenth and twentieth 

centuries, thus crossing the divide between the “old” and “new” colonial-
ism. Despite its broad temporal and geographic scope, the contributors reach 
several common conclusions. First, they point to the fact that – with the pos-
sible exception of Britain – “trade to and from the non-Western world was 
marginal and served as a chasse garde for uncompetitive firms” (p. xxviii).

Second, they note that “all authors agree that the spin-off effects of non-

European trade were limited in economic as well as in geographic scope” (p. 
xxviii). This implies that the question is best explored at a local rather than a 
national level. Third, “most contributors confirm the fact that the British model 
of expansion and colonial trade seems to have been the exception and not the 
rule” (p. xxix). On the whole the essays are persuasive. While it is unlikely 
that this book will end the debate, certainly those who wish to support the 
notion that colonial trade played a major role in the development of Europe 
will have to contend with the evidence and arguments it presents. While I 
learned a lot from these essays, I do have a complaint. The volume lacks a full 
scholarly apparatus. Several of the essays are only lightly footnoted, a major 
handicap in a volume that is often historiographical in its focus. Further, there 
are no maps and no bibliography. Certainly, given the prices Brill charges, 
readers have a right to expect a more impressive scholarly apparatus. 

If A Deus ex Machina is a direct frontal assault on the notion of Atlantic 

history, Sherryllynne Haggerty’s study is an oblique flanking movement. The 
major competitor to the idea of treating the Atlantic littoral as a whole is the 
much older tradition of slicing it up into several discrete parts defined by 
the empires of the various European nations that colonized the Americas. 
Thus there is a British Atlantic, French Atlantic, Iberian Atlantic, and so on. 
As Haggerty’s fine study demonstrates this older tradition still has much to 
recommend it.

Haggerty uses case studies of Philadelphia and Liverpool to study the 

British Atlantic trading community over the years 1760 to 1810. Usually, 
studies of those involved in trade have focused on elite male merchants. 
Haggerty breaks with the dominant historiographical tradition by defining 
trader more broadly to include everyone involved in the distribution of goods 
– retailers, auctioneers, peddlers, higglers, and hucksters – and this allows 
her to assess the role of lesser traders, including women in the distribution 
of goods around the Atlantic. Although Haggerty’s argument that Britain’s 
“Empire of Goods” could not have functioned without the contributions of 
these “lesser folk” is persuasive, I am not fully convinced that all these trad-
ers constituted a “community.” Haggerty argues that they shared a common 
business culture of risk, enterprise, trust, and reputation, and that they con-
stituted a “community of interests” (p. 966) because of similar concerns with 
politics and government. While she tells us a lot about who these traders 
were and how they functioned within the distribution network, she fails to 

show them coming together to pursue a common political goal and thus is not 
fully persuasive that the traders constituted a community.

Despite her failure to show that traders in either city actually functioned as 

a community, Haggerty has written an important book that deserves the close 
attention of all students of Early Modern trade. By defining trader broadly, 
she is able to show in great detail how goods were distributed in the British 
Atlantic world of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. The compari-
son of Philadelphia and Liverpool is effective and illuminating. The two cities 
shared enough to merit comparison: both aspired to be the second city of the 
Empire, both were deeply involved in Atlantic trade and were home to substan-
tial Quaker populations, both are well documented, and the volume of trade 
between them was high. While the two cities were similar in many respects, 
there were enough differences to make comparison revealing. Haggerty’s stan-
dards of scholarship are high. She makes good use of the available sources, city 
directories, newspapers, court records, and the private records of traders. Her 
care in using city directories is especially impressive and should be consulted 
by anyone contemplating using such sources. While this book is primarily a 
contribution to the history of trade and commerce, it is also an important con-
tribution to women’s history, for Haggerty shows how, despite the substantial 
legal and cultural obstacles they faced, women still played a central role in the 
business of distributing goods throughout the British Atlantic.

Haggerty does not directly take on the issue of the impact of colonial 

trade on European development, but some of her results do speak to the 
issue. First, she seems to agree with the contributors to A Deus ex Machina 
that the profits of colonial trade did little to finance industrialization. With 
the exception of sugar refining and shipbuilding, few of the traders Haggerty 
studied invested in manufacturing activities. On the other hand, the distribu-
tion and credit networks she describes, initially created to serve the needs 
of Atlantic and colonial trade, could easily be turned to serve the needs of 
England’s new industrialists. Indeed, it is here, on the impact of colonial trade 
on distribution and credit networks and associated institutions rather than on 
the sources of capital for industrialization that the debate over the impact of 
the Americas on European economic development is likely to focus in the 
future. Finally, the networks Haggerty describes seem to have been entirely 
contained within the British Empire, suggesting that while there clearly was 
a British Atlantic, the larger, more inclusive Atlantic World that has so cap-
tured the attention of historians in recent decades is largely the product of the 
imagination of a few historians.

Caribbean Slave Revolts and the British Abolitionist Movement. GELiEn 
MaTTHEWs. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2006. xiv + 
197 pp. (Cloth US$ 42.95)

aLvin O. THOMPsOn
Department of History and Philosophy
University of the West Indies
Cave Hill Campus, Barbados
<thompsonaot@yahoo.co.uk>

Within the last few decades a number of scholars have focused attention on 
slave agency in the abolition of British slavery in the Caribbean. A few of 
them, such as Hilary Beckles and Richard Hart, have expressed the firm con-
viction that it was the enslaved people who were largely instrumental in the 
abolition of the system. While they do not argue that the enslaved played as 
comprehensive a role in abolition as their counterparts in St. Domingue, they 
assert that they challenged the slave system in a more deliberate way in the 
last few decades before abolition. The polemical title of Hart’s work, Slaves 
Who Abolished Slavery (1985), speaks clearly to this viewpoint. Earlier, 
Eric Williams, in dealing with the issue of slave agency, had asserted that it 
was a case of “emancipation from above, or emancipation from below. But 
EMANCIPATION” (Williams 1994:208).

Traditionally, interpretations of abolition have placed considerable, and in 

some instances almost exclusive, emphasis on the role of the British abolition-
ists in effecting the demise of slavery. While slave uprisings in the Caribbean 
were noted, they were often viewed as irritants or factors that tended to mitigate 
the slavery system and to place the abolitionists in a difficult position to main-
tain the view that these “bloodthirsty savages” were ready for emancipation. In 
other words, they tended to retard the progress of emancipation, the argument 
went, by indicating clearly that the enslaved were not sufficiently civilized to 
understand the meaning of freedom and to make positive use of it.

Gelien Matthews’s book confronts these two, seemingly opposing, views 

of abolition and in a sense tries to reconcile them. She makes it clear that her 
intention is not to prove the precedence of one over the other, but rather to 
show that they interacted closely with each other in bringing about abolition. 
She declares that her book “provides the missing volume in the history of 
British abolitionism by examining the activist response to and utilization of 
the rebellion of nineteenth-century slaves in the English Caribbean” (p. 10), 
and she points out that her theory presents two foci. “First, it sets the slaves’ 
agency against the abolitionists’ in its analysis of the struggle against slav-
ery. Second, the theory emphasizes that the major historical significance of 

slave rebellions was the achievement of emancipation” (p. 10). At the same 
time, she argues that the theory of “emancipation from below” is seriously 
flawed because it “ignores that slavery was practically ended by British par-
liamentary legislation” and “erroneously elevates slave rebellion above other 
factors in the achievement of emancipation” (p. 11). Certainly, Matthews has 
not reflected the contention of Williams here, for, as noted above, he argued 
that the British parliamentary decision to end slavery was based largely on 
economic circumstances in Britain that had made slavery in the Caribbean 
colonies an anachronism, and he praised the humanitarians for the propa-
ganda campaign that they conducted (1994:136, 169, 178).

The strength of Matthews’s study does not lie in any attempt to determine 

whether emancipation was effected from above or below, but rather to show 
in much more elaborate and careful detail the interrelationship between slave 
rebellions and antislavery propaganda. She assembles more than enough evi-
dence to build a cogent argument for the view that the leaders of the antislav-
ery movement moved cautiously, but in the end boldly, to the conclusion that 
slave rebellions were a logical reaction to the brutalities of slavery, and that 
such rebellions were used to promote the cause of abolition in Parliament. 
She opines that whereas before, members of the antislavery group were 
largely on the defensive when the pro-slavery group (represented largely 
by the West India interest in Britain) accused them of directly or indirectly 
fomenting rebellion in the colonies through their propaganda (p. 3), they now 
openly attacked the pro-slavers by arguing that it was the latter who were 
responsible for the rebellions (pp. 92, 103, 106, 121, et passim). She also 
argues that by the early 1830s it was these rebellions that were putting the 
pro-slavers on the defensive, while providing ammunition for the antislavery 
arsenal (pp. 55, 96). Using the Jamaica rebellion of 1831-1832 as one of 
several examples, she declares that “the crucial lesson of their failure helped 
stir the abolitionists into propaganda action” (p. 111). She goes on to point 
out that the London Anti-Slavery Society decided to hold public meetings in 
several parts of the United Kingdom to highlight the plight of the enslaved in 
Jamaica that led to the revolt and its brutal suppression.

Matthews’s book is well researched. Her primary sources include various 

published debates and other documents of the British Parliament; numerous 
pamphlets and other publications produced by the Anti-Slavery Society and a 
number of leading abolitionists’ unpublished documents in the British National 
Archives, the various missionary societies, the West India Committee, and so 
on; and the large body of polemical literature found in various magazines, 
newspapers, and periodicals in Britain. The debate on British abolitionism will 
continue long after the publication of her study, but her work should find an 
important place in the vast body of literature on the subject. My only regret 
about this work is that it does not include an index. I can only presume that this 
was due to an oversight (a major one) on the part of the publishers.

REfEREnCEs

HaRT, RiCHaRd, 1985. Slaves Who Abolished Slavery – Blacks in Rebellion. Vol. 2. 
Mona, Jamaica: Institute of Social and Economic Research.

WiLLiaMs, ERiC E., 1994. Capitalism and Slavery. Chapel Hill: University of North 
Carolina Press. [Orig. 1944.]

Flight to Freedom: African Runaways and Maroons in the Americas. aLvin 
O. THOMPsOn. Kingston: University of the West Indies Press, 2006. xi + 
381 pp. (Paper US$ 40.00)

RiCHaRd PRiCE
Department of Anthropology
College of William and Mary
Williamsburg VA 23187-8795, U.S.A.
<rich@richandsally.net>

This synthetic work wavers between modesty (“Because of space constraints 
... I have not dealt, except in passing, with the social and cultural dynamics of 
Maroon life” [p. 8]) and expansive claims (“No study to date has attempted 
to provide the pan-American scope that is critical in understanding the role 
of marronage in the struggle of the hemisphere’s enslaved populations for 
freedom and dignity” [rear cover]). The book’s goals are laudable but the 
author’s reach tends to exceed his grasp. In the end, it is just one more addi-
tion to a growing bookshelf on its chosen subject. 

Placing the basis of marronage in a kind of naturalized ideology of free-

dom, Alvin Thompson draws on numerous, largely historical, secondary 
sources to skim through such themes as the establishment of Maroon com-
munities, military expeditions against them, the uses of judicial terror in slav-
ocracies, the physical organization of Maroon communities, Maroon govern-
ment, Maroon economy, and finally negotiations and treaties, and Maroons 
and revolutionary struggle. In the process, he touches on several topics that 
have drawn increasing attention during the last few years – maritime marron-
age, urban marronage, and relations between Maroons and Indians.

The text shies away from serious comparison and takes the form of strings 

of cherry-picked facts, giving it a faintly old-fashioned air. This thematic 
organization works better for some topics, such as punishments (for which 
the cumulative horror of multiple cases is palpable), than for others, such as 

government, which demand greater depth. Its dependence on older historical 
syntheses (those of Yvan Debbasch, Gabriel Debien, and José L. Franco) rath-
er than works by anthropologists who have lived with Maroons considerably 
lessens its overall persuasiveness. For example, to write about Maroon treaty-
making without drawing on (or even citing) Kenneth Bilby’s incisive compara-
tive analysis (1997) or to deal with the aftermath of treaties and the return of 
runaways without reference to Alabi’s World (Price 1990) undercuts its analy-
sis and conclusions. And to discuss the formation of the two largest Maroon 
societies in the Americas, the Ndyukas and Saramakas, without reference to 
the two most important books on Ndyuka history (Thoden van Velzen & Van 
Wetering 1998 and 2004) and without any mention at all of any of the half-
dozen relevant books by the Prices on Saramaka history published since 1983 
(see, for the full list, http://www.richandsally.net) seems at best puzzling.

Thompson’s judgments sometimes run counter to current orthodoxies. He 

deserves praise for arguing against the thesis, promoted by John Thornton 
and others, that Maroon communities based their organization on African 
ethnic identities. But much of the available evidence for his argument is in 
sources he does not cite.

Since Maroon Societies: Rebel Slave Communities in the Americas (Price 

1973) first laid out the contours of the field, a significant number of general 
books have appeared on runaways, maroons, and slave revolts – by schol-
ars as diverse as Eugene Genovese, Michael Craton, Gad Heuman, Rafael 
Duharte Jiménez, and Flávio dos Santos Gomes. Thompson’s new synthetic 
attempt adds little to that growing shelf. Indeed, the in-depth studies that con-
tinue to appear on the history of particular Maroon societies (such as Bilby 
2005, Price 2008, or Thoden van Velzen & Van Wetering 2004, to mention 
just a few) often seem to go farther toward answering the kinds of questions 
that Thompson poses – what was the role of African ethnicity? how did gen-
der roles develop? what was Maroon military organization like? what was 
the role of ideology in the formation of these societies? and so forth – than 
this historically and ethnographically uncontextualized summary.

REfEREnCEs

biLby, kEnnETH, 1997. Swearing by the Past, Swearing to the Future: Sacred Oaths, 
Alliances, and Treaties among the Guianese and Jamaican Maroons. Ethnohistory 44:655-
89. 

—, 2005. True-Born Maroons. Gainesville: University Press of Florida.

PRiCE, RiCHaRd, 1973. Maroon Societies: Rebel Slave Communities in the Americas, 
New York: Anchor Books. [3d rev. ed., 1996, Baltimore MD: Johns Hopkins University 
Press.]

—, 1990. Alabi’s World. Baltimore MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.

—, 2008. Travels with Tooy: History, Memory, and the African American Imagination. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

THOdEn van vELzEn, H.U.E. & W. van WETERinG, 1988. The Great Father and the 
Danger: Religious Cults, Material Forces, and Collective Fantasies in the World of the 
Suriname Maroons. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Foris.

—, 2004. In the Shadow of the Oracle: Religion as Politics in a Suriname Maroon Society. 
Long Grove IL: Waveland.

Mambisas: Rebel Women in Nineteenth-Century Cuba. TEREsa PRadOs-
TORREiRa. Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2005. xii + 185 pp. 
(Cloth US$ 59.95)

ada fERRER
History Department
New York University
New York NY 10012, U.S.A.
<ada.ferrer@nyu.edu>

With Mambisas: Rebel Women in Nineteenth-Century Cuba, Teresa Prados-
Torreira has provided a much needed exploration of the role of women in 
Cuba’s struggle for independence from Spain. In the last ten or so years, 
there has been a resurgence of work on Cuban nationalism and anticolonial 
insurgency, much of it focused on the links between slavery, race, and nation-
alism. But none of this work has taken as its central concern the participation 
of women in anticolonial politics. On that score alone, Mambisas represents 
an important contribution to our understanding of the history of Cuban inde-
pendence and the history of Cuban women. But what is further noteworthy 
about the book is the fresh and dynamic way Prados-Torreira goes about 
recovering that history. 

She begins with three background chapters devoted to the place of 

women in Cuban society before the start of the first war of independence 
in 1868. The heart of the book, however, is in the following chapters, which 
treat in depth the period of insurgency against Spain, beginning with the Ten 
Years War (1868-1878), the interwar period (1880-1895), and the final War 
of Independence (1895-1898). Prados-Torreira lays out the main problems 
at stake in each of the conflicts and argues that women’s participation was 

central throughout. Using brief, well-crafted, and engaging biographical por-
traits to carry her narrative forward, she paints a dynamic portrait of women 
active in both the military and political wings of the nationalist movement. 
Thus, though the term mambí was usually used to denote armed (or unarmed) 
insurgents camped in the woods and doing physical battle against the Spanish 
army, Prados-Torreira’s mambisas are that and more. For both wars, she finds 
ample evidence of women taking active roles in armed insurgency: as fight-
ers, as messengers, as nurses traveling with the troops, and in rare cases as 
officers. But she also pays significant attention to women who participated in 
different ways, as members of organized pro-independence groups in exile, 
as journalists and essayists, and, in general, as civilian activists who raised 
money, advocated, and participated centrally in debating and imagining the 
nation. These were women who met semisecretly with Ulysses S. Grant to 
request protection for Cuban medical students recently arrested by the colo-
nial government; who outlined petitions to the United States to grant bel-
ligerency status to the Cuban rebels; and who served as delegates to receive 
funds being sent from revolutionary Cubans in exile.

Though much of the women’s activism and energy was devoted to the cause 

of independence, there were some instances in which they sought an expansion 
of their rights not only as Cubans but also specifically as women. Early in the 
first war at the meeting of the First Constitutional Assembly, Ana Betancourt 
took the floor to praise the revolution’s willingness to “destroy the enslave-
ment of the cradle ... [and] the slavery of color” and to call on it to attack the 
unfreedom of women as well (p. 84). In the final war, women such as Edelmira 
Guerra and Aurelia Castillo wrote specifically about the expansion of women’s 
rights in independent Cuba, the former (unsuccessfully) petitioning the rebel 
government to include women’s suffrage in the rebel and then the national 
constitution. For Prados-Torreira, these women represent the “double aspira-
tions for Cuba’s freedom and women’s citizenship” (p. 82). Still, she argues, 
for most of the women studied in the book, it was the former that appeared to 
take precedence. In this way, her study of Cuban women is broader in scope 
that Lynn Stoner’s important work on twentieth-century Cuban women (1991), 
which limited its focus largely to women and politics explicitly feminist. 

Prados-Torreira has done a commendable job with a topic inherently chal-

lenging because of the scarcity of sources. Information on women involved 
in the military campaigns is diffuse in the records and, when present, it is 
often enticing but frustratingly thin. Prados-Torreira acknowledges and dis-
cusses these obstacles and then goes about constructing a lively narrative 
that is still able to convey a world of politics and war populated, if unevenly, 
of women of different class and racial groupings. Less satisfying at times is 
her discussion of the things that moved these women to become involved. 
Though the answer most often is nationalism, that nationalism too often 
remains a vague and naturalized entity. Laying aside the certainty that that 

was always the motivating factor, or going further in questioning particular 
meanings of nationalism at particular moments might have left more room 
for richer interpretations of women’s patriotic poetry, of vibrant letters writ-
ten from wives to husbands, and of women’s public and private defenses of 
their incursion into the male world of war and politics. Still, Prados-Torreira 
has written an important and original contribution to the study of Cuban 
women and Cuban nationalism. In this admirable book, we see a facet of the 
independence movement that not only has long been overlooked, but one that 
was a central feature of its operation.

REfEREnCE

sTOnER, k. Lynn, 1991. From the House to the Streets: The Cuban Woman’s Movement 
for Legal Reform, 1898-1940. Durham NC: Duke University Press.

Music and Revolution: Cultural Change in Socialist Cuba. RObin d. 
MOORE. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2006. xvi + 350 pp. (Paper 
US$ 24.95)

MaREia qUinTERO-RivERa
History Department
University of Puerto Rico
Río Piedras Campus, San Juan 00931, Puerto Rico
<mareiaquintero@yahoo.com>

Cuban music enjoys a long history of international dissemination and rec-
ognition. After 1959, debates surrounding the island’s cultural production 
have been characterized by what Cuban critic Rafael Rojas (2006) describes 
as a symbolic war over memory and representations. Looking at the Cuban 
music scene before and after the Revolution from schematic “revolutionary” 
or “counterrevolutionary” points of view has been detrimental to gaining an 
understanding of the complex relationships between music and politics in 
contemporary Cuban history. Robin D. Moore’s Music and Revolution is a 
thoroughly documented book that undertakes the challenging project of pass-
ing balance over Cuban music production in the last five decades, in order to 
“broaden the dialogue about the lessons to be learned from the revolutionary 
experience” (p. xiv). 

The book addresses the trajectories of major popular genres, placing a spe-

cial emphasis on the impact of cultural policies upon music production, and 
the ways in which musicians have responded to changing political and social 
circumstances. It is broad in scope and contains rich and detailed informa-
tion on the island’s musical milieu – clearly, the result of years of extensive 
research. Aside from the impressive documentation effort, the main contribu-
tion of Music and Revolution, in my view, is its focus on how transforma-
tions in musical styles and in music-making take place. Moore succeeds in 
presenting Cuban music within the context of changes in the island’s politi-
cal, economic, and social conditions since the 1950s, and yet not merely as a 
reflection of those transformations. Thanks to a great amount of testimonies, 
as well as a careful examination of music production, he manages to trace 
the ways in which musicians participate in the shaping of new styles and 
practices. Music is addressed here as a site for negotiating individual and 
collective concerns about the role of culture within a socialist society. 

The book’s introduction states its purpose – examining the relationship 

between socialist thought and cultural policies in socialist states, using Cuba 
as a case study (p. 2). The consideration of how Marx’s ideas, Soviet social 
realism developed under Stalin’s rule, or the Chinese Cultural Revolution 
influenced Cuban cultural policies is indeed an interesting subject, partial-
ly addressed in Music and Revolution. However, Cuban political and cul-
tural history presents too many particularities, within the context of former 
Socialist states, to serve as a locus for answering such a far-reaching initial 
question. Throughout the book, Moore offers interesting references on cul-
tural policies in the Soviet Union and other socialist contexts, but the book 
is clearly focused on Cuba and its specificities as a Caribbean and Latin 
American socialist society. 

Even though Music and Revolution focuses on the decades following 1959, 

it provides substantial background information on Cuba’s music environment 
before the Revolution. Actually, Moore devotes a whole chapter to a depiction 
of the musical scene of the 1950s. In subsequent chapters, while examining 
the trajectories of specific genres, he offers valuable references to the pre-
Revolutionary period. This approach is worth noting, since it enables an anal-
ysis of cultural transformations in socialist Cuba that does not overemphasize 
a radical rupture. While addressing the impact of significant changes in the 
political and economic spheres on music-making, Moore also develops inter-
esting explanations for musical transformations that take into account certain 
persistent practices and traits of Cuban cultural dynamics. For instance, a his-
torical overview of dance music, allows him to suggest that the dance music 
genres, such as modern timba, continue to offer a place for the Afro-Cuban 
youth to affirm blackness in a society where racial prejudice defies political 
changes. It should be mentioned that Moore is also the author of an excellent 
book on Afro-Cuban culture in the prerevolutionary period (Moore 1997).

The impact of sudden transformations – due to new political situations 

– in music-making and the development of cultural policies under the social-
ist regime are the subjects of Chapters 2 and 3. Among the issues discussed 
here are: the early compositions praising the revolutionary triumph; the crisis 
of cabarets as a result of the sudden decrease in tourism and the closing of 
casinos; the nationalization of theaters and cultural spaces; the intellectual 
and literary effervescence during the first years following the Revolution; 
the inauguration of a massive literacy campaign; the promotion of an ama-
teur’s artistic movement; the establishment of significant cultural institutions 
such as Casa de las Américas and the ICAIC (Instituto Cubano de Artes e 
Industrias Cinematográficas); the initial abolition of copyright and its con-
sequences to the music industry; the development of specialized music edu-
cation; the centralization of music businesses under the state’s control; and 
questions concerning artistic freedom. 

Chapters 4 through 7, which develop analyses of dance music, nueva 

trova, Afro-Cuban folklore, and sacred music, constitute the core of the book. 
All of these case studies stand as great contributions to the history of music-
making in socialist Cuba. The decision to encompass such a broad historical 
period and such a wide range of genres, however, limits the possibilities for 
deeper analyses. Even though Moore provides certain musical examples to 
sustain his views, none of the musicians or styles addressed in the book is the 
subject of a profound discussion. 

Music and Revolution is a fundamental contribution to the understanding 

of cultural dynamics in contemporary Cuba. It is well written and supported 
by serious research. Readers who are not familiar with the Cuban Revolution 
will find a fascinating overview of political and social processes, through 
the lens of musical production. At the same time, connoisseurs of the Cuban 
process will discover new perspectives and insights into the multifaceted 
relationships of culture and politics in the island. 

REfEREnCEs

MOORE, RObin d., 1997. Nationalizing Blackness: Afrocubanismo and Artistic Revolution 
in Havana, 1920-1940. Pittsburgh PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.

ROJas, RafaEL, 2006. Tumbas sin sosiego: Revolución, disidencia y exilio del intelectual 
cubano. Barcelona: Editorial Anagrama. 

Cuba’s Agricultural Sector. JOsé áLvaREz. Gainesville: University Press of 
Florida, 2004. xxvi + 307 pp. (Cloth US$ 75.00)

Reinventing the Cuban Sugar Agroindustry. JORGE PéREz-LóPEz & JOsé 
áLvaREz (eds.). Lanham MD: Lexington Books, 2005. xxv + 323 pp. (Paper 
US$ 27.00)

aLan dyE
Department of Economics
Barnard College, Columbia University
New York NY 10027, U.S.A.
<ad245@columbia.edu>

With all the recent talk of transition in Cuba, and the desperate need to address 
the longstanding crisis in living conditions, surprisingly little attention seems to 
be given these days, in the popular press, to the problems of Cuban agriculture. 
From a historical standpoint, after all, every period of significant economic 
prosperity in Cuba was dependent on a thriving agricultural sector. It seems 
quite unlikely that prosperity could be restored in the near future without it 
depending on agriculture. The two books under review here bring together the 
state of current academic knowledge about the performance and future pros-
pects for Cuban agriculture, and thus represent absolutely essential reading. 

Cuba’s Agricultural Sector, by prominent expert in Cuban agricultural 

economics, José Alvarez, is a comprehensive treatment of the state of Cuban 
agriculture, tracing its development from before the Revolution of 1959 
through the 1990s. It opens with a sobering reflection: “It is impossible to 
write a book on Cuba’s agricultural sector without at least mentioning the 
waste of resources resulting from projects badly conceived and executed” (p. 
xii). The core of the analysis in the pages that follow does more than “men-
tion the waste of resources,” painstakingly studying the agricultural mea-
sures undertaken since 1959, and documenting and analyzing empirically the 
decline in the efficiency of Cuban agriculture through the 1990s. 

Alvarez traces the development of Cuban agriculture from the beginning 

of the republican period to the end of the 1990s. Part 1 offers an insightful 
overview, summarizing the most significant events and developments prior 
to the Revolution, highlighting the transformation after 1959, and then focus-
ing on the antecedents to the new agricultural policies adopted in the 1990s. 
Part 2 describes and assesses the principal policy changes of the 1990s. This 
part gives particular attention to the adoption and performance of Basic Units 
of Cooperative Production (UBPCs) which have been the major vehicle for 
partial (really marginal) privatization in agriculture, the reauthorization of 

small private farmers’ markets, and the limited role of foreign investment in 
agriculture. Part 3 examines problems of food security and environmental 
degradation. And Part 4 offers some valuable reflections on the future of 
Cuban agriculture. 

One of the laudable aspects of the work is its broad focus on the agricul-

tural sector as a whole, including export crops (sugar and tobacco) and the 
major food crops. The main proposition involves a comparison of changes in 
productivity after 1959 in state and nonstate sectors. Alvarez finds that from 
1959 to 1993 state production was consistently less productive than nonstate 
production, both in quantitative and qualitative terms. This is in spite of the 
fact that nonstate agriculture faced disadvantaged access to factors of pro-
duction. Furthermore, although the 1994 reforms introducing UBPCs were 
expected to improve productivity by providing stronger incentives, Alvarez 
concludes that they generated mixed results at best, and an apparent decline 
in the productivity of the nonstate sector, as they transferred the problems 
that were plaguing the state sector to the nonstate sector.

Reinventing the Cuban Sugar Agroindustry gathers an all-star cast of 

experts on Cuban sugar, including the editors, Jorge Pérez-López and José 
Alvarez, and reflects a remarkably forward outlook on recent developments, 
international context, and prospects for recovery of the Cuban sugar indus-
try. Given limited space, it is impossible to assess the contribution of each 
of the outstanding essays in this extraordinary collection. Although collec-
tions of this nature usually display significant variability in quality and some 
significant gaps in coverage, this volume suffers from neither weakness. All 
the essays are of the highest quality and the coverage exceeds expectations, 
with some truly imaginative and brilliant contributions. As a whole, it is an 
invaluable collection of analyses of the utmost relevance to the current prob-
lems facing Cuban sugar today.

Part 1 consists of essays on four major dimensions of sugar agroindus-

trial development in historical perspective. The first, by Joseph Scarpaci 
and Armando Portela, explores how the each of the major historical periods 
has shaped the natural and cultural landscape. The second, by Jorge Pérez-
López, is an analysis of the state of Cuban sugar at the end of the 1990s, 
relative to the post-1959 decades, showing the veil of inefficiency that was 
lifted by the ending of Soviet subsidies. The third, by Brian Pollitt, is an 
examination of the adoption of new technology in Cuban sugar production, 
which demonstrates, among other things, that the technical changes toward 
mechanization also produce more import-intensive technology, with obvious 
implications for the adjustment to the post-1990 crisis. The fourth essay, by 
G.B. Hagelberg, chronicles Cuba’s troubled history of international trade in 
sugar, leading to the decline of preferential purchases of sugar by the Soviet 
bloc and sugar-oil swaps in the 1990s. He shows that production targets are 
now no higher than those of the Great Depression. 

Part 2 examines the current international environment, which sets the 

parameters for Cuban sugar exports in the near future. Sergey Gudoshnikow 
examines prospective growth in international demand for sugar to 2010. Tim 
Josling considers the outlook for liberalization of the sugar trade in WTO 
negotiations. Devry Boughner and Jonathan Coleman explore the legal pos-
sibilities for a reopening of the U.S. sugar market to Cuban sugar. 

Part 3 examines the most pressing issues surrounding the uncertain but 

ongoing transition in Cuban sugar agroindustry. José Alvarez and Jorge Pérez-
López outline how the restructuring of the Cuban sugar industry has proceed-
ed from 2002 to 2004, an important extension to the analysis Alvarez offers 
in his book Cuba’s Agricultural Sector. As an important complement, G.B. 
Hagelberg and José Alvarez assemble the available evidence on the costs of 
sugar production. On the assumption that capital requirements for the recon-
struction of the Cuban sugar industry will pressure the Cuban government to 
privatize, Matías Travieso-Díaz examines the problems that will emerge from 
outstanding legal claims of expropriation of sugar mills and plantations by 
former owners. Undoubtedly, these matters would become of greater signifi-
cance if the Cuban government, as part of the transitional plan, were to nor-
malize international relations with major industrial leaders. Travieso-Diaz’s 
essay gives a valuable examination of the issues and possible ways forward. 

Part 4 considers possible paths of future improvement and product 

diversification of the Cuban sugar industry. Guilherme Rossi Machado, Jr. 
explores the age-old problem of putting more research energy into the devel-
opment of new cane varieties. José Alvarez and George Snyder examine the 
possible benefits of the rice-sugar rotation program. Findlay Pate outlines the 
use of sugarcane by-products for cattle feed, discussing its advantages and 
limitations. Lindsay Jolly considers the possibilities for developing a market 
for organic sugar. Pedro de Assis examines the prospects for using sugarcane 
as a raw material for ethanol and electricity, as a possible way to reopen 
the seventy mills that have been closed, showing significant advantages that 
should be taken seriously if the forecasts for an international market for etha-
nol continue to develop. Sergio Trinidade extends this kind of analysis to 
discuss the revolutionary idea of a sugarcane biorefinery – a value chain that 
uses sugarcane to produce an entire range of products, including solid and 
gaseous fuels, stillage, fiber, sucrochemicals, and ethanol-derived chemicals, 
clearly in expectation of continuing declines in the demand for sugar exports. 
All in all it represents a remarkable program for transforming Cuban sugar 
agriculture into a modern, green, and diversified sugar agroindustry. 

These two books are the most important works to appear on the range of 

proposals for a successful transition in Cuban agriculture. Critics may object 
to the continued focus on sugar when for decades economists have been 
recommending a more diversified industrial structure, but the extensive evi-
dence in the pages reviewed here makes clear that sugar remains the sector in 

which Cuba would have the greatest latent comparative advantage, if reforms 
could inject more capital for modernization, and the greatest depth of pro-
ductive knowledge and skills. Reinvigorating those skills, then attending to 
their spillover into other sectors, is a more promising strategy than abandon-
ing them in pursuit of a singular focus on tourism and other services. One of 
the most pronounced messages of these two books is that, to date, post-1959 
state policies toward agriculture have ended in failure, but the prospects, 
if the right steps are taken, could reestablish Cuba as a leader in the global 
industry – a goal worthy of pursuing.

Islands, Forests and Gardens in the Caribbean: Conservation and Conflict 
in Environmental History. RObERT s. andERsOn, RiCHaRd GROvE & 
kaRis HiEbERT (eds.). Oxford: Macmillan Caribbean, 2006. xxii + 266 pp. 
(Cloth US$ 22.35)

LaWREnCE s. GROssMan
Department of Geography
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg VA 24061, U.S.A.
<lgrossmn@vt.edu>

The literature on environmental history in the Caribbean has been relatively 
limited compared to such research on other regions. Thus, Islands, Forests 
and Gardens in the Caribbean is a welcome addition. The collection had its 
origin in a 1991 environmental conference on the island of St. Vincent com-
memorating the two hundredth anniversary of the creation of the Kings Hill 
forest reserve on that island. It is regrettable that it took so long to appear.

As in any edited volume based on a conference, the chapters vary in quality, 

but overall the collection is a valuable resource for Caribbean researchers inter-
ested in history and environment. The major focus is on environmental institu-
tions and legislation during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Although 
most chapters focus on the British Caribbean, useful comparative material on 
French colonial environmental initiatives helps broaden the book’s appeal. The 
chapters excel in providing historical details and analysis, but little reference is 
made to broader debates in the literature on environmental history.

Robert S. Anderson, the conference organizer, provides the context for the 

other chapters by focusing on two hundred years of environmental institutions 
and asserts that there is a direct lineage between today’s population and those 

in the late eighteenth century who established the St. Vincent botanical garden 
and the Kings Hill forest reserve. Roughly half of the chapters are devoted 
to St. Vincent (those by Richard A. Howard, Adrian Fraser, Michael Kidston 
et al., and Hymie Rubenstein), while others highlight cases from Dominica 
(Lennox Honychurch), Barbados (David Watts), Saint Domingue (James E. 
McClellan III), and Martinique (Clarissa Kimber). Two chapters are more 
comparative in orientation – Richard Grove’s work on the origins of forest 
conservation in the Eastern Caribbean and Madeleine Ly-Tio-Fane’s discus-
sion of plant transfers between the Indo-Pacific and Caribbean regions. Key 
themes throughout the chapters are the significance of early botanic gardens, 
attempts to control deforestation and soil loss, the impacts of settlement and 
plantation agriculture, and the cultural importance of gardens and forests.

The most impressive part of the volume focuses on early botanic gardens 

in the region and their linkages to emerging empire-wide scientific networks 
in which plants such as coffee, cocoa, clove, nutmeg, and peppers were redis-
tributed throughout the world and provided the economic foundation for colo-
nial enterprises. Readers obtain a clear and comprehensive understanding 
of the endeavors of botanic gardens, which involved varying combinations 
of knowledge-seeking, experimentation, cataloging, intrigue, theft, coop-
eration, and strategic planning. Madeleine Ly-Tio-Fane’s work is the most 
wide-ranging, discussing early Italian, Portuguese, and Dutch efforts at plant 
transfers and subsequent botanic initiatives by the British and French. Her 
insightful chapter portrays the importance of the search for medicinal plants 
as an initial inspiration for establishing botanic gardens, the resulting excite-
ment generated in Europe by the introduction of exotic flora and fauna, and 
the geopolitical and economic significance of plant transfers for competing 
empires. James E. McClellan’s article on the French colony of St. Domingue 
is enlightening in its portrayal of the environmental hazards and constraints 
faced by early settlers and the environmental impacts of plantations. Clarissa 
Kimber’s chapter focusing on the first botanical garden in the French Antilles 
– Le Jardin Colonial des Plantes de Saint-Pierre on Martinique – is particu-
larly well researched. She notes that the garden contributed to the accumula-
tion of diversity within the gene pools of economic plants and to the island’s 
biodiversity. Richard H. Howard describes the early years of the St. Vincent 
botanical garden, which was established in 1765, with a particular focus on 
the remarkable career and contributions of Alexander Anderson, the second 
director of the gardens who was instrumental in developing the ordinance to 
protect the forests on Kings Hill. 

The second strength of this volume is the analysis of scientific ideas about 

the environment and environmental legislation during the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries. Two chapters stand out in this regard. David Watts’s 
impressive discussion of environmental institutions and legislation on 
Barbados examines efforts by both successive government administrations 

and individual planters to cope with environmental degradation. He attributes 
the lack of legislation directed toward preserving environmental quality on 
Barbados to political uncertainty during the period and the emphasis at the 
time on using colonial resources to spur economic growth in the empire. 
The longest and most substantive of the chapters in the collection is Grove’s 
analysis of the origins of forest conservation in the East Caribbean during the 
eighteenth century, which carefully details early environmental initiatives on 
Tobago and St. Vincent and their relationship with intellectual currents within 
Britain. Grove’s chapter reveals a complex set of influences on the develop-
ment of environmental legislation, ranging from European conceptions about 
the relationship between forests and climate, initiatives of the London-based 
Society of Arts, and determined resistance by Caribs on St. Vincent.

This collection is not meant to be a comprehensive review of environ-

mental history in the Caribbean. For example, it does not include any materi-
als on the critical period of the second half of the nineteenth century during 
which the Colonial Office in London spurred empire-wide efforts at control-
ling deforestation. Nonetheless, it is an important and worthwhile addition to 
the limited literature on Caribbean environmental history.

The Kings Hill Enclosure Ordinance of 1791 – the inspiration for this 

volume – created a forest reserve on St. Vincent with the hope that it would 
attract clouds and rainfall. Hopefully, this volume will attract more interest 
in the environmental history of the Caribbean.

The State and Small-Scale Fisheries in Puerto Rico. RiCaRdO PéREz. Gaines-
ville: University Press of Florida, 2005. xx + 218 pp. (Cloth US$ 59.95)

ManUEL vaLdés Pizzini
Interdisciplinary Center for Coastal Studies and Sea Grant College Program
University of Puerto Rico
Mayagüez 00681-9011, Puerto Rico
<manuel.valdes@upr.edu>

In 1972 James C. Faris published his landmark ethnography, Cat Harbour: A 
Newfoundland Settlement, a book that inspired a number of young scholars to 
enter the field of maritime anthropology. Nevertheless Cat Harbour was not 
a book about fishing, but an extraordinary study of the complex social and 
historical processes that were transforming coastal communities in Canada.

Similarly, Ricardo Pérez’s The State and Small-Scale Fisheries in Puerto 

Rico is not a book about fishing, but an excellent monograph on the plight 
of coastal communities in colonial and postcolonial contexts. Using an eth-
nographic and historical approach to study three communities in the munici-
palities of Peñuelas and Guayanilla in southern Puerto Rico, Pérez intro-
duces readers to a riveting analysis of development and how that process was 
entrenched in the daily lives of coastal dwellers.

Pérez’s meticulous examination of fisheries development provides a 

“human face” to the complexities of the colonial and postcolonial modern-
ization projects. Through examination of a number of technical reports, 
unpublished materials, films, historical documents, and interviews with gov-
ernment officials and fishers, Pérez reconstructs the role of the “state” in 
fisheries development and describes the ways in which such actions were 
intertwined with agrarian reform and the industrialization strategies of the 
government of Puerto Rico.

Pérez concludes that fishing was the last item on the list of priorities, given 

the array of developmental alternatives available to the island throughout the 
twentieth century, including the legacy of the New Deal (under Franklin D. 
Roosevelt) in the reconstruction of the local economy and the industrialization 
program of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. In fact, fisheries development 
focused on the seemingly superficial aspects of the industry (the aesthetic and 
health conditions of the landing centers) while investing a dismal amount of 
funds in the buildup of the infrastructure needed for production growth. 

In other words, the government of Puerto Rico retarded fisheries develop-

ment, in a context dominated by the slow demise of agriculture, increased 
industrialization and modernization, and an always cheap supply of salted 
cod from Newfoundland. The “state” maintained the status quo in which 
the fishers and their communities remained a flexible source of labor for 
other, more important, sectors of the economy. Pérez’s well-documented and 
elegant analysis of fisheries development is perhaps the most important con-
tribution of his book. Indeed, recent debates on the local fisheries are using 
Pérez’s findings to assess policies and build strategies for the future.

Coastal communities are at the epicenter of economic development, as 

they are located in landscapes characterized by high capital mobility and 
devastating transformations of nature imprinted in the “fragments of mem-
ory” of coastal peoples. The communities studied by Pérez are located at 
the margins of the largest petrochemical complex and refinery built on the 
island, now partially defunct. Sponsored by the government in the late 1950s, 
the Commonwealth Oil Refining Company (CORCO) became the site for 
capital investment and infrastructure development for many transnational 
companies. As a result, the coastal environment changed dramatically and 
the agricultural landscape disappeared. Such enormous capital investment, 
construction, and production processes altered the social and labor fabric of 

the nearby towns, which attracted and forced many communities into wage 
labor in this new form of production or to migrate to other labor markets; a 
familiar process for many Caribbean islands, such as Trinidad and St. Croix. 
Pérez’s ethnography is a powerful documentation of the perceptions and 
memories of the environmental disaster that CORCO brought upon the land-
scape and its coastal communities and habitats.

In that historical context, fishers, as “petty commodity producers,” were 

an essential component of the “flexible communities” that restructured 
household production and labor strategies to adjust to new opportunities, 
threats, and constraints imposed by industrialization. Fishers engaged in pro-
duction for the new markets and became operators of “small-scale commer-
cial fisheries,” as this type of fisheries required a “small capital commitment 
to sustain (or further) production” (p. 36). In this theoretical shuffle, Pérez 
eliminates the use of the terms “artisanal” and “traditional,” often appearing 
interchangeably in the literature. Ironically, he uses the incomplete term of 
“small-scale fisheries” throughout the book, and even in the title.

Pérez covers plenty of ground in his book, as he criticizes “maritime 

anthropology” for its lack of a clear theoretical beacon. Instead, he argues, 
“maritime anthropology” must focus on the labor arrangements and diverse 
forms and relations of production into which coastal communities are 
inserte d on a local, regional, and global scale. To underscore his point, Pérez 
presents short life histories of the complex trajectories of fishers-laborers on 
those scales. Although I should be the last person to critique such a point of 
view, I would argue that he brushes aside too quickly the value of a mari-
time anthropology interested in fisheries biology, ecological adaptations, and 
forms of knowledge. This is a minor concern, as Perez’s review of maritime 
anthropology is one of the best critiques available.

The book is a fundamental contribution to the anthropology of develop-

ment, postdevelopment, and coastal communities. Its narrative is a conduit 
for the many and different voices that experienced this colossal social change 
and development (including technocrats) – voices gathered and organized 
from the “fragments of memory,” which should have been the title of the 
book, as was the original title of his dissertation.

REfEREnCE

faRis, JaMEs C., 1972. Cat Harbour: A Newfoundland Fishing Settlement. Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press. [Newfoundland Social and Economic Studies No. 3.]

Globalization and Race: Transformations in the Cultural Production of 
Blackness. kaMaRi MaxinE CLaRkE & dEbORaH a. THOMas (eds.). 
Durham NC: Duke University Press, 2006. 407 pp. (Paper US$ 23.95)

fRanCE WinddanCE TWinE
Sociology Department 
University of California-Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara CA 93106, U.S.A.
<winddance@soc.ucsb.edu>

This edited volume, the fruit of a session at the 2001 American Anthropological 
Association meetings organized by Deborah Thomas, Kamari Clarke, and 
John Jackson, is a theoretically ambitious attempt to reframe globalization 
studies by placing blackness at the center. Clarke and Thomas seek to “recu-
perate the power of race as a central category of social analysis without either 
falling into essentialisms or forestalling the possibility of developing a criti-
cal analysis that overarches the specificities of location” (p. 3).

Consisting of an introduction and sixteen chapters that cover Canada, 

Cape Verde, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, England, Germany, Italy, 
Jamaica, Nigeria, Puerto Rico, South Africa, Sweden, and the United States, 
it is divided into three sections. The contributors address a compelling range 
of cultural sites, from dance classes, fashion, heritage industry, housing, geo-
politics, and migrant labor to music, nationalism, religion, television, tour-
ism, gentrification, and modernity. In the process, they map new theoretical 
approaches and empirical sites in their analyses of the consumption, produc-
tion, translation, and negotiation of blackness. 

The volume is conceptually bound together by three theoretical strands. 

First, there is analysis throughout on the meanings and limitations of the 
concept of diaspora. Several of the authors problematize the concept, for-
mations, and racial logics of “diaspora” and diasporic communities as they 
have been imagined, institutionalized, and reproduced in the United States, 
Europe, and the Caribbean. There is also a sustained focus on capitalist mar-
kets, consumption, marketing, and the circulation of products and practices 
that present “authentic” blackness or Africanness. Commercialized versions 
of “blackness” are embedded in the negotiation of power and the meanings 
of “Africanness.” A third theoretical strand examines mobility, travel, and 
the spatial dimensions of racial and cultural production. Space, travel, and 
the racialization of specific neighborhoods, labor regimes, housing develop-
ments, and national narratives are examined in the chapters on Canada, Cape 
Verde, New York, and U.S./Nigerian relations.

Commentary on a few representative chapters from each section of this 

rich volume may serve to illustrate the range of empirical data and the theo-
retical breadth. Part One, “Diasporic Movements, Missions and Modernities,” 
introduces the themes that “will animate the rest of the volume.” In two theo-
retically compelling chapters, Tina Campt and Jacquelyn Nassy Brown prob-
lematize and interrogate the “limits and tensions of diasporic solidarity” (p. 
108). Campt, a historian, argues that “diaspora does not constitute a historical 
given or universally applicable analytic model for explaining the cultural and 
historical trajectories of all black populations” (p. 108). She notes that what 
distinguishes black Germans from U.S. Blacks is “the lack of shared narratives 
of home, belonging, and community that sustain so many other black commu-
nities on which they draw as ‘resources’ in numerous ways. As a result, [she 
goes on] black Germans have never regarded a sense of relation and belong-
ing among themselves or to other black communities as self-evident” (p. 95). 
Brown’s analysis of the relationships between U.S. black soldiers and Blacks 
in Liverpool argues that gendered ideologies about locality “produced black 
Liverpool and black America as social spaces to be differently occupied” and 
that for black women in Liverpool, “black America represented a resource for 
attaining a form of self-respect that was unavailable locally” (p. 87). 

Part Two, “Geographies of Racial Belonging,” is organized around the 

theme of travel and spatial mobility. Kamari Maxine Clarke moves between 
South Carolina, Nigeria, and the U.S. academy to analyze the meaning, mar-
keting, and consumption of “roots tourism” by U.S. Blacks actively con-
structing transnational black identities. She concludes that African nobility-
redemption and slavery narratives that emerged in the United States in the 
1960s are central to “conceptions of racial belonging embedded in a more 
aggressive form of capital institutionalism conducive to the marketing of 
black Americanness” (p. 135). Kesha Fikes analyzes migrant labor codes in 
Cape Verde, exploring how a “legal relationship to free or indentured travel” 
constituted “race” and racial ambiguity through “spatial” distribution of bod-
ies, leaving residues on contemporary national debates. 

In Part Three, “Popular Blackness, Authenticity and New Measures of 

Legitimacy,” Ariana Hernandez-Reguant examines the popularity of timba 
music in Havana during “late socialism” and after the loss of Soviet support 
which generated an economic crisis in Cuba. As capitalist markets created 
new opportunities for disenfranchised Afro-Cubans, timba circulated on radio 
and television and in dance clubs and contested official national discourses by 
locating the “black experience at the heart of what it meant to be Cuban in a 
post-Soviet era caught between the imperatives of socialist morality and market 
expansion ... it naturalized blackness and along with it difference and inequal-
ity” (p. 251). Lena Sawyer analyzes the marketing, meanings, and consump-
tion of African dance classes by white European women in Stockholm, where 
Swedish women constitute half of the instructors of African dance. Sawyer 

argues that African dance classes are “a space where people performed ‘Africa’ 
to debate and negotiate racialized, gendered, and sexualized understandings of 
belonging and community in Stockholm ... in these particular spaces African 
dance was commodified and formed through the desires of middle-class 
white Swedish women and working class black African men” (p. 332). Oneka 
Labennet analyzes the cultural consumption of black New York girls of West 
Indian parentage in Brooklyn to understand their employment of food, fashion, 
music, and television to assert a transnational black identity. 

The editors and contributors to this volume deliver what they promise. This 

is a theoretically breathtaking contribution to the study of globalization, nation-
alism, racism, late capitalism, late socialism, migration, and cultural produc-
tion. With insights that will enrich interdisciplinary and international studies 
as well as African and black studies, anthropology, sociology, cultural studies, 
European studies, and Latin American studies, it should be required readings in 
courses devoted to global capitalism, migration, race, and cultural studies, and 
not just to those dealing with Blacks or the African diaspora. 

Haitians in New York City: Transnationalism and Hometown Associations. 
fRançOis PiERRE-LOUis, JR. Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 
2006. viii + 158 pp. (Cloth US$ 55.00)

ELizabETH MCaLisTER
Departments of Religion and African American Studies
Wesleyan University
Middletown CT 06459, U.S.A.
<emcalister@wesleyan.edu>

This book is a tightly focused look at a single unit of organization – home-
town associations – among Haitian immigrants in New York City. Through 
this focus, François Pierre-Louis, Jr. is able to contribute to the literature on 
ethnic identity formation, transnationalism, immigrant citizenship, and the 
role of the sending state in transnational processes. Those particularly inter-
ested in the Haitian case, or in comparing transnational social organizations, 
will find this an interesting work. It is most useful in its description of the 
particular political dynamics of hometown associations and the tensions they 
mediate within Haitian society in its various locales.

Hometown associations (which are never explicitly defined in this book) 

are voluntary clubs consisting of immigrants from a particular village (in this 

case in Haiti) now living in a host society (in this case New York City). Pierre-
Louis describes how they are at once social clubs, fund-raising groups for 
development projects back in the hometown, political platforms from which to 
forge coalitions with other groups in New York, and arenas for cultivating pres-
tige and status. Drawing on the literature on transnational migration and eth-
nicity, he agrees with those who argue that Haitians have adopted a segmented 
assimilation pattern (in other words, maintaining cultural differences while at 
the same time seeking to incorporate themselves into the U.S. economic and 
political system). He sees hometown organizations as an arena within which to 
practice this strategy while simultaneously intensifying involvement in Haiti. 
“They have become the linkage institutions that maintain contact with Haiti 
while helping immigrants integrate in U.S. society” (p. 5). 

Pierre-Louis explores the interesting and perhaps not self-evident dynami c 

whereby a person who becomes active as a political actor in Haiti through 
a hometown association in New York is likely, in turn, to become active in 
politics in the United States. For Haitian immigrants, building prestige, con-
nections, and capital in one place translates readily into cultural capital in the 
other, and often politicians in New York will be expected to connect local 
issues with those in Haiti. Ironically, Haitians in New York have learned that 
when it comes to defending what they perceive as Haiti’s best interests they 
can be more effective as U.S. citizens than as mere legal residents (p. 10). 

Chapter 1 examines the differences between Haitian and Mexican reali-

ties. The Mexican state has been much more proactive in formalizing rela-
tionships with hometown associations as “fully fledged partners of the state,” 
which has led to the associations prospering, while the Haitian government 
has been unable to coordinate any formal support, leaving the Haitian orga-
nizations independent and struggling (pp. 18-19). Haitian hometown orga-
nizations in turn became spaces for ethnic identity formation in the United 
States. Pierre-Louis also argues that U.S. Haitians who learn participatory 
democratic practices work to bring those values and practices to Haiti. 

Chapter 2, “The Social Construction of New York’s Haitian Community,” 

examines the history of Haitian migration to that city and explores how earlier 
exile politics differed from more current, integration politics. Chapter 3 looks 
at hometown associations as a hedge against African-American status and as 
organizations that do the development work the Haitian government has failed 
to perform. Chapter 4 looks explicitly at the failure of the Haitian state to pass 
any legislation to incorporate diaspora Haitians – or hometown associations 
– into the political process, but for a few measures in 2002 that do not equal 
other countries’ more effective policies. Pierre-Louis argues that hometown 
associations are more effective than foreign NGOs in addressing the needs of 
their region – a significant claim that unfortunately goes unsupported. 

Chapter 5 focuses on New York City, and it presents data showing that 

Haitians involved in hometown associations are typically first-generation 

immigrants who have maintained ties with Haiti, are U.S. citizens, and are 
also involved in other organizations such as churches, neighborhood groups, 
unions, and the PTA. Chapter 6, on race and religion, argues that Haitians dis-
affiliate with African Americans to some extent, and that “anything that has 
to do with the country [Haiti] becomes sacred and revered” (p. 102). Chapter 
7 looks at the development, since the 1970s, of Haitians as a separate eth-
nic group – and political voting bloc – in New York, and demonstrates how 
Haitians have consistently organized separately from African Americans. 

Theoretical weakness marks this otherwise valuable work. Pierre-Louis 

alternates between the terms “segmented assimilation,” “integration,” and 
“incorporation,” without engaging the theoretical implications of these dif-
ferently freighted concepts. Likewise, no theory frames his discussion of the 
Haitian state’s relationship to hometown associations, especially in terms of 
long-standing systems of patronage (and corruption). Transnationalism theory 
is also underdeveloped. Pierre-Louis may be overly celebratory of hometown 
associations, which he says are democracy promoting and class leveling 
and contribute to the breaking down of historically oppressive social barri-
ers between urban and rural Haitians. The celebratory tone contradicts many 
problems illustrated in the book, such as the ways the associations concentrate 
development projects in the hands of ex-patriot benefactors without profes-
sional training or state coordination, the duplication of projects by compet-
ing groups, the tensions between local and diaspora Haitians, and the sheer 
potential for corruption and mismanagement of funds raised in New York. 
Pierre-Louis does a nice job of self-reflexively describing his own social posi-
tion as a first-generation immigrant to New York himself, as a Queens College 
political scientist who was also a cabinet member of former Haitian President 
Aristide, and as a member of a Haitian hometown association. His careful pre-
sentation of information on these interesting grass-roots transnational political 
and social organizations will be of great interest to many.

Mobilizing India: Women, Music, and Migration between India and Trinidad. 
TEJasWini niRanJana. Durham NC: Duke University Press, 2006. 272 pp. 
(Paper US$ 21.95)

aisHa kHan
Department of Anthropology
New York University
New York NY 10003, U.S.A.
<ak105@nyu.edu>

Mobilizing India is motivated by two central concerns. It represents Tejaswini 
Niranjana’s encounter with Indo-Trinidadians and the ensuing questions 
about the construction of “Indian” identity that her own subcontinental sub-
jectivity raised during visits to the West Indies. And it represents her desire to 
join the scholars who have sought to displace Western/metropolitan vantage 
points as the standard against which questions about modernity, national-
ism, and gender in non-Western/nonmetropolitan contexts are measured and 
debated. In creating theoretical frameworks where comparative discussions 
among Global South countries can be undertaken, Niranjana’s objective is 
to counter the conventional use of such concepts as gender and modernity 
and emphasize the different meanings they acquire in different contexts – for 
example, what it means to call oneself “Indian” in two Southern locations, 
India and Trinidad. Arguing that she is what she is “because of who the East 
Indian woman in Trinidad is” (p. 20, her italics), Niranjana discusses the ways 
female indentured laborers were defined, notably in terms of their gender 
and sexuality, by Indian nationalist agendas which constructed the modern 
Indian woman as the bourgeois antithesis of her independent, bold diasporic 
sister in the cane. Niranjana suggests a linkage between this history and the 
meaning of “Indian” represented in contemporary cultural practices such 
as calypso, and in Indo-Trinidadian women’s subversive agency in chutney 
soca – the latter representing their “refusal ... to be ‘translated’” into defini-
tions of proper gender identities (p. 52). Ultimately, her project involves the 
search for alternative, non-Western/nonmetropolitan forms of consciousness 
about bases of solidarity that can emerge from popular culture. 

With her “fellow South Asians” in mind (p. 3), Niranjana raises a number 

of questions having to do with the ways we might “learn to question the epis-
temological structures through which knowledges about Third World peoples 
are produced” (p. 14). Making a point that echoes calls by such international-
ist thinkers as W.E.B. Du Bois (among others), Niranjana urges speaking “to 
each other across the South” (p. 13) in order to emphasize shared (colonial 
and neocolonial) histories and the similar stakes that multiple nationalities 

have under particular historical conditions. Toward this end we are asked 
to consider what kinds of new significance might be given to old assump-
tions, for example, what happens when “a South Asian reads the West Indian 
Kamau Brathwaite” (p. 13). Yet this raises the issue of epistemological tra-
ditions and the subject positions emerging from them. Is there a possibility 
that such contrasts unwittingly sustain essentialized identities? Who is that 
South Asian, who is that West Indian? Also, while conversations between 
Southerners unmediated by the Global North are imperative, we must take 
care to approach all Global South locations as themselves hierarchically posi-
tioned – economically, geopolitically – and as objects in the Western/metro-
politan gaze. The “spectacular international visibility of the ‘Indian’”(p. 6) 
today partly reflects a hierarchy within the Global South. While Niranjana 
rightly critiques “classical anthropology” for studying the Other largely to 
tell the West about itself (p. 9), the goal of Indians in India to learn about 
their own past (p. 19) from South Asian diasporas requires careful crafting to 
avoid being similarly motivated or interpretable in the same way. 

This is not to suggest that comparative, revisionist efforts are not impor-

tant or that they are unrealizable, but only that the mutual influence that 
Southern localities have on each other is a multilayered and complex kind 
of juxtaposition. For example, Niranjana suggests that it is important for 
“East Indians and India Indians not ... to disavow chutney-soca as derivative 
or hybrid,” but to term it “Indian,” since doing so underscores the conti-
nuity and discontinuity of this identity, making it simultaneously “Indian” 
and “Trinidadian” (p. 54). On-the-ground examination, however, makes 
this simultaneity unlikely to be consistent: in local cultural politics “Indian” 
and “Trinidadian” are commensurate only according to particular contexts. 
Moreover, raised again is the question of essential, and “Indian,” identities. 
What are the cultural boundaries around the subaltern? If chutney soca is 
multiply resonant and subversive, then it could also be so among grass-roots 
Afro- and other non-Indo-Trinidadians. Niranjana is clearly aware that the 
symbolic importance of India is put into play on the ground of Afro-Indo 
relations. Yet her interest in representations and the deployment of catego-
ries, such as “women,” for example, and disinterest in “simply talking about 
empirical women” (p. 218) requires that we steer our conceptual frameworks 
between the Scylla of overabstraction and the Charybdis of essentialism. Not 
only is empirical fieldwork never simple, but talking to (rather than merely 
about) “empirical women” allows them to contribute to any research project, 
especially ones that seek to de-center Western/metropolitan hierarchies and 
create alternative, ostensibly more just spaces for solidarity.

Based on secondary and primary archival sources and complemented by 

a number of interviews conducted between 1994 and 2004, the discussion 
in Mobilizing India covers ground that will be familiar to Caribbeanists, 
for example, the politics of calypso and chutney, indenture and diaspora, 

Trinidadian history, contemporary racial tensions, and Third World schol-
ars’ relationship with the Other. But Niranjana is building on key works and 
themes in order to make a larger case for the value, nay, necessity, of com-
parative research agendas that displace an “inherent asymmetry” (p. 11), dis-
lodging the West from its centrality. If Mobilizing India traverses familiar 
terrain, it focuses our attention on some key issues in the relationships among 
colonial and postcolonial identity formation, popular culture, and modernity. 
It also productively reminds us about the always crucial question of episte-
mological perspective that shadows efforts, even revisionist ones, to chal-
lenge hegemony and reconceptualize hierarchy. Finally, it reminds us that 
diasporas are shaping and mediating forces in themselves, rather than yet 
another manifestation of cultural shreds and patches.

Afro-Central Americans in New York City: Garifuna Tales of Transnational 
Movements in Racialized Space. saRaH EnGLand. Gainesville: University 
Press of Florida, 2006. xvi + 274 pp. (Cloth US$ 59.95)

GRanT JEWELL RiCH
Department of Social Sciences
University of Alaska Southeast
Juneau AK 99801, U.S.A.
<optimalex@aol.com>

While a number of scholars have conducted helpful work on the Garifuna in 
Central America (e.g., Taylor 1951; Gonzalez 1969; Kerns 1997; Roessingh 
2001), with several notable exceptions (e.g., Palacio 2005) there has been 
a relative paucity of research on the transnational migration of the group. 
Sarah England who has conducted field work in Limon, Honduras, and New 
York City has written an important book on this issue, including much dis-
cussion of the impact of family relations, economic practices, and grass-roots 
social organizations.

The Garifuna are, as England aptly notes, 

an Afro Indigenous people born out of the mixture of Africans and Caribs 
on the island of St. Vincent, exiled to Central America, and turned trans-
national migrants to the United States since the 1940s. They are thus 
members of three diasporas – the African diaspora, the Garifuna diaspora, 
and the Central American diaspora. They are simultaneously black, indig-

enous, and Latino; Honduras, Belizean, Guatemalan, Nicaraguan, and 
North American; part of Central America and part of the Caribbean. As 
an ethnic group they share a common language, history, and culture that 
unites them across national borders. (p. 1)

England estimates the total population of Central American Garifuna to be 
about 200,000, with the largest concentration (about 100,000) in Honduras. 
She argues that the population of Garifuna in the United States is about the 
same as the total population of Garifuna in Central America, with the highest 
concentrations in New York City, Los Angeles, and New Orleans. 

The book is sensibly organized. In the first chapter, England surveys the 

intellectual terrain, noting that she does not intend to privilege either Limon 
or New York City but instead to treat both with equal weight. She reminds 
readers that for two hundred years the Garifuna have traversed national bor-
ders for work, family, and ritual reasons, and thus, in one powerful sense at 
least, migration to the United States is not as much of a break with tradition as 
a continuation of a way of life. Her next chapter is a concise yet helpful his-
tory of the Garifuna from the St. Vincent years to the present. Her third chap-
ter examines matrifocal kinship as it is manifested transnationally. Chapter 4 
focuses on the challenges of a division of labor when family members live in 
multiple nations. Finally, the last several chapters focus on the development 
of grass-roots organizations and on racial and ethnic identity politics in the 
Garifuna diaspora, especially given the realities of a Garifuna population that 
has been described as a “nation across borders” (Palacio 2005).

What has motivated the continued migration? Among a number of factors, 

England notes the impact of success stories of migrants that appear, Horatio 
Alger style, to fulfill the American Dream of rags-to-riches. She relates the 
story of one such migrant who arrived in the United States in the 1970s and, 
working as janitor, sent a monthly remittance of about one hundred dollars 
home to his mother in Honduras. Ultimately, he was able to build a nice 
cinderblock house in Limon for his mother, complete with stereo, televi-
sion, a VCR, and an electric generator. While this migrant is seen as a model 
of a good native son, the Garifuna of modernity express a variety of views 
concerning migration. For some, it is viewed as progress; for others, it is the 
disintegration of economic autonomy for Garifuna villages. Indeed England 
notes that the Garifuna among whom she lived sometimes refer to remittance 
dependency as “Garifuna welfare.”

England also notes the dramatic impact of Hurricane Mitch in 1998 on 

Honduras and the Garifuna. The devastation from this disaster left approxi-
mately 22,000 dead and three million homeless, destroying homes, roads, 
and crops and dramatically impacting the GDP of the nation. Before the hur-
ricane, the number of Hondurans migrating to the United States was sur-
passed by migrants seeking to avoid civil strife in El Salvador, Guatemala, 

and Nicaragua, but after it the number of Hondurans migrating increased. 
Deportations from the United States have also increased, and England dis-
cusses the issue of the deportation of “tens of thousands of gang members 
to El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras” (p. 58) who were reared mostly 
in the United States, many speaking no Spanish, whose “only prospects for 
survival are to continue gang activity in Central America” (p. 58). England 
attributes the fact that the murder rate in Central America has risen, even 
above Colombia’s notoriously high rate, to these deportations.

England’s discussions of transnational migrations and social movements 

are intriguing, and one finds it hard to resist making comparisons between 
the Garifuna of Limon and the Garifuna in other nations and other indig-
enous Central American groups, such as the Maya. For instance, how have 
the sociohistorical and cultural contexts of these other groups along lines of 
race, class, and gender impacted cultural survival? Detailing such compari-
sons is a tall order and perhaps England has sensibly left such work for future 
researchers. Nevertheless, she has outlined some important developments in 
a Pan-Garifuna identity, such as transnational Garifuna activist groups and 
cultural organizations.

England’s multisited ethnography represents a substantial contribution. It 

will undoubtedly be a book that both university libraries and scholars with 
interests in the Garifuna, migration patterns, and cultural survival will want 
to add to their collections.

REfEREnCEs

GOnzaLEz, nanCiE L., 1969. Black Carib Household Structure: A Study of Migration 
and Modernization. Seattle: University of Washington Press.

kERns, viRGinia, 1997. Women and the Ancestors: Black Carib Kinship and Ritual. 
Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

PaLaCiO, P. (ed.), 2005. The Garifuna: A Nation Across Borders. Benque Viejo del 
Carmen, Belize: Cubola Productions.

ROEssinGH, CaREL, 2001. The Belizean Garifuna: Organization of Identity in an Ethnic 
Community in Central America. Amsterdam: Rozenberg.

TayLOR, dOUGLas, 1951. The Black Carib of British Honduras. New York: Wenner-
Gren Foundation.

Black Puerto Rican Identity and Religious Experience. saMiRi HERnándEz 
HiRaLdO. Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2006. xxii + 292 pp. 
(Cloth US$ 55.00)

RaqUEL ROMbERG
Department of Anthropology
Temple University
Philadelphia PA 19122, U.S.A.
<rromberg@temple.edu>

This book offers a welcome, timely history of religious pluralism in Loíza, 
characterized in the national imaginary as one of the most “African” 
(and seemingly poorest) towns in Puerto Rico. Focusing on a number of 
recentl y established religious transformations within Catholic and Protestant 
churche s, Samiri Hernández Hiraldo suggests quite convincingly that con-
trary to popular assumptions not all Loízans find the revitalization of their 
African heritage, in general, and the practice of Afro-Puerto Rican religions 
(such as popular espiritismo, brujería, and Santería), in particular, the proper 
answer for their spiritual/cultural needs. I consider this to be the most valu-
able contribution of the book. 

The centrality of religion in Loíza is evidenced by the presence of more 

than thirty-eight registered Protestant churches as well as several nonregis-
tered small churches on every corner among a population of thirty thousand 
people. Also, Hernández Hiraldo notes the rapid growth of traditional and 
nontraditional Pentecostalism and the dramatic transformation of historical 
Protestant and Catholic churches toward more charismatic modes of wor-
ship. The vitality of various religious organizations (especially Pentecostal) 
is further evidenced by a growing access and control of the media and par-
ticipation in national public debates and community services, as well as 
involvement in a thriving Christian-music industry. 

Hernández Hiraldo claims that Loízans are primarily concerned about 

their identity – “individual, family, community, town, national, transnational, 
socioeconomic, religious, cultural, racial, generational and gender” (p. 4) 
– the religious management of their identity being “both the cause and the 
result of this central role of identity” (pp. 3-4). What remains unresolved 
throughout the book, however, is the empirical explanation for the mush-
rooming of religious institutions and the apparent obsession with identity of 
both religious leaders and churchgoers in Loíza.

Hernández Hiraldo decides instead to “focus on religion to explore iden-

tity” (p. 5), which in my view ends up limiting the methodological and theo-
retical import of this book, particularly in addressing the complex phenom-

enology of religious experience. For instance, even though a large part is 
dedicated to tracing in great detail the competition, development, rise, and 
fall of various religious leaders and institutions, as well as the opinions of 
residents about their identity, readers learn comparatively little about how 
issues of identity are actually elaborated during worship in these institu-
tions and in the messages delivered by these leaders (except in the sermon of 
Pastor Correa [pp. 2-3]). 

Perhaps my expectations based on the book’s title explain my slight dis-

appointment at the end when I realized that it focused less on the connection 
between “black identity” and “religious experience” than on the develop-
ment of religious leadership and institutional dynamics, peppered with the 
opinions of religious and community leaders and residents as to the reasons 
for church attendance, and less (except the excellent discussions in chapters 
6 and 9) on the actual religious experiences of those Loízans who perceive 
their blackness as a major aspect of their self-identification. 

Hernández Hiraldo situates her research interests in Loíza and in religion 

as a native (white) anthropologist and practicing Baptist raised in a nearby 
town. Readers learn that this closed as well as opened many doors for her 
during twelve months of fieldwork, consisting of an unspecified number of 
visits spread over seven years, during which she conducted archival, textual, 
and some participatory research that included administering a census and 
interviewing. 

The book reads well overall, except for a number of spelling errors, awk-

ward wording, and editing problems (such as offering dates for the found-
ing of organizations and explanations for new terms, after having already 
mentioned them earlier in the text). Also, some judgmental conclusions are 
unfortunate; for example, those that dismiss certain so-called “tangible” (i.e., 
expressive, emotional) aspects of charismatic Protestant worship and healing 
for gratifying “poor and uneducated” worshippers “much as a placebo” (pp. 
84-85), and others that express the author’s “hope” for more church activism 
in solving the problems of Loíza. 

These misgivings aside, the book makes an important contribution to 

mapping the history, development, and internal dynamics of religious insti-
tutions in a highly competitive context, dispelling the public image of Loíza 
as a hub of primarily Afro-Latin cultural and religious practices. 

Post-Emancipation Race Relations in the Bahamas. WHiTTinGTOn b. 
JOHnsOn. Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2006. xii + 190 pp. (Cloth 
US$ 59.95)

GRaCE TURnER
Department of Anthropology
College of William and Mary
Williamsburg VA 23187, U.S.A.
<gsturn@wm.edu>

In the book under review author Whittington Johnson selected the period 
1834-1865 as these were formative years for a free society in the Bahamas. 
Since the Bahamas was a former slave-holding society Johnson focused his 
research mainly on persons of African descent. This included those who were 
freed by the 1833 Emancipation Act, those who were free before 1834, and 
those Africans who had been rescued from slave ships and resettled in the 
Bahamas after the slave trade was abolished. As this transition period was 
very unsettled in places such as Jamaica and the southern American states, 
Johnson is most interested in understanding the factors that contributed to a 
peaceful transition in the Bahamas. 

Little research has been done on this period in Bahamian history so this 

book is a welcome addition to Bahamian historiography. Gail Saunders’s 
Bahamian Society after Emancipation (1990) focuses more on the late nine-
teenth and early twentieth centuries. Johnson used an array of archival doc-
uments in examining the nature and extent of change to race relations in 
postemancipation Bahamian society. He examined the level of access black 
Bahamians had in politics, education, and the justice system as well as the 
role established religion played in this transformed Bahamian society. 

His questions about political change centered on issues of whether the 

nonwhite electorate would vote only for nonwhite candidates and create a 
nonwhite majority in the assembly. He also wondered whether Mulattoes 
would form their own political group or whether they would ally with Whites. 
The Removal of Civil Disabilities Act of 1833 accorded Creole Blacks the 
same privileges as Whites but was not extended to African-born persons. 
This was based on the prevailing attitude that Africans were not sufficiently 
“civilized” to be able to appreciate these privileges.

Though Blacks were the overwhelming majority in the population only 

a handful were elected to parliament. On the Out Islands (those other than 
New Providence), white merchants easily manipulated the electorate because 
they controlled the supply of goods on which residents depended. In the pub-
lic service nonwhites (the term Johnson prefers to use) were appointed to 

a range of posts including a few top level ones. By the 1840s the colonial 
policy was to avoid using racial categorizations except in the case of African-
born individuals. 

The Bahamas was not a prosperous colony. Johnson considered what 

impact the addition of over ten thousand freed laborers had on the post-
emancipation Bahamian economy. Most apprentices, as they were officially 
known, became sharecroppers or squatted on what was presumably govern-
ment land since the purchase price was generally too high for many to afford. 
The majority of the populace lived on the Out Islands but New Providence 
had the most varied population with the largest percentage of Whites and the 
largest number of upper- and middle-class nonwhites. 

With few opportunities for cash wages, apprentices preferred the per-

ceived independence of small-scale production and maritime ventures as 
wrecking and collecting sponges. This had the greatest impact on the two 
main export products – salt and pineapples. As exports there was money to 
be earned in their production but the production process made for difficult 
working conditions. Efforts to bring in more workers all failed. Johnson’s 
primary finding on the postemancipation economy was that although former 
slaves were free to choose how they made a living, wealthy Whites still con-
trolled the colony’s economy, so the substantial changes in their legal status 
did not translate into any equally significant economic changes. 

Johnson laments that the Anglican Church in the Bahamas did not make 

a greater effort to proselytize Bahamians of African descent. They estab-
lished several chapels on New Providence to accommodate apprentices and 
liberated Africans but little was done on the Out Islands where most people 
lived. Several Out Islands had no Anglican church and priests rarely visited. 
This opened the way for the Methodists and Baptists to win more converts 
throughout the Bahamas. 

After emancipation the Anglican Church maintained a policy against 

racially segregating their worship services or schools. In the Anglican cathe-
dral in Nassau seating set aside for the poor at the back of the cathedral and 
in the choir loft would have been filled by Blacks but middle- and upper-
class nonwhites were not restricted to these areas. The Methodist Church had 
no such policies and they developed their largest congregations on the few 
Out Islands with substantial white populations. The Baptists, on the other 
hand were most popular among black Bahamians.

The Anglican Church was also very involved in public education in the 

Bahamas. However they focused mainly on elementary education. One 
attempt at establishing a college prep school failed because of disagreements 
between denominational groups. The colonial government gradually assumed 
more responsibility for education but this included no increased funding for 
facilities, staffing, or tertiary-level education. Wealthier families, regardless 
of color, were not affected by these policies. In the criminal justice system 

the first black Bahamian lawyer was able to point out some of the inequities 
in a judicial system based on a highly stratified society.

Johnson did a thorough analysis of the institutional effects of the immedi-

ate postemancipation years on nonwhite Bahamians. However his research 
suggests that other factors, such as population demographics and social sta-
tus, also served to limit access and stifle dissent. His point is well taken as 
the patterns that developed in this thirty-year period set the trends for the 
next century. For the Bahamas the hurdles to overcome were not just race 
but also social class. 

REfEREnCE

saUndERs, GaiL, 1994. Bahamian Society after Emancipation. Kingston: Ian Randle. 
[Orig. 1990.]

Planning the Past: Heritage Tourism and Post-Colonial Politics at Port 
Royal. aniTa M. WaTERs. Lanham MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2006. x + 
123 pp. (Paper US$ 18.95)

POLLy PaTTULLO
London SW4 0EY, U.K. 
<pollyp@globalnet.co.uk>

The history of Port Royal has something for everyone, points out Anita M. 
Waters about the plans for the renovation of one of Jamaica’s most famous 
towns as a “heritage tourism site.” That is part of the problem for Port Royal. 
It is also, perhaps, a problem for this interesting, well-researched if uneven 
piece of writing. 

There is a great story here as Waters has uncovered. The historical asso-

ciations of Port Royal, on the tip of the etiolated peninsula that frames 
Kingston’s harbor, are rich and stimulating. Port Royal was once described 
as “the wickedest town in the western world”; nowadays, travel writers (and 
planners and tourist board bureaucrats) call it a “sleepy fishing village.” Its 
history is multilayered and depends on your perspective. Take your pick: 
Arawaks, pirates, sailors, admirals, prostitutes, slaves, free people, herbal-
ists, architects, fishermen, goldsmiths, inn-keepers, merchants, millionaires 
have all, at one time or another, peopled its community. Some characters, of 

course, are more fascinating – and more problematic – than others, especially 
if you are planning a theme-park Disneyfication of history.

Proposals for the reconstruction of Port Royal’s history as a tourist attrac-

tion is the rationale of this book. People interpret the past in different ways 
according to their own needs and imaginations and, of course, many people, 
especially the powerless, have their pasts “remembered” for them by others. 
This is particularly relevant, as Waters, points out in the context of Jamaica 
– and, indeed, the whole Caribbean. 

For tourism developers, Port Royal has two key historical identities to 

draw on: as a rip-roaring, piratical, and fantastically wealthy trading port in 
the seventeenth century, and as a British colonial naval station in the eigh-
teenth century, briefly visited by Lord Nelson. These two beams of colonial 
interest are chronologically separated by the earthquake of 1692 when Port 
Royal disappeared beneath the waves. 

Plans for the restoration of what is now a small – and neglected – town 

as a tourist showcase have been in the pipeline since independence. None, 
to date, have materialized. The reasons for this, Waters argues, are as much 
about an ambivalence of identity and historical representation as they are 
about a failure to secure investment and the product of political will.

Waters documents the different proposals in some detail. All reflect 

changing trends in tourism thinking – from a concentration on white sand 
beaches (with imported sand) and resort hotels to a more nuanced pack-
age that includes “interactive street performers” (p. 40) and an underwater 
archaeological museum. More importantly, she analyzes how, over the years, 
a Eurocentric narrative has been replaced by a more inclusive one. 

Even so, pirates – a very Eurocentric preoccupation – and Port Royal go 

together. Indeed, the pirate theme is popular throughout the Caribbean (Jolly 
Roger cruises in Barbados, a pirate museum in the Bahamas, for example) of 
the tourists’ imagination: pirates represent freedom (cruising around the high 
seas, no government to tell you what to do, with wenches on each arm and 
doubloons in every pocket). What is interesting though is that this iconogra-
phy does not extend to African-Caribbean populations and, in particular, to 
some African Jamaicans who view pirates as “common thieves.”

Waters backs this up with evidence from a range of sources, including her 

own research among the contemporary community of Port Royal. Indeed, 
she finds pirates blamed for the crime rate in Jamaica. “Renowned bucca-
neers such as Henry Morgan are being labeled as great Jamaicans. It is there-
fore not surprising that the Jamaican society is so besieged with so many 
delinquencies,” commented a group of students who had made their own 
proposals for the redevelopment of Port Royal (p. 56).

Beyond the developers, historians, tourists, archaeologists, and politi-

cians who are engaged in putting Port Royal back on the map are the town’s 
residents. Waters does not forget this group of 1,100 or so citizens – often 

ignored in the design of tourism projects. While the developers sit on their 
hands, the environment of Port Royal suffers from neglect – buildings and 
infrastructure crumble. Residents wait for something to happen. They, too, 
have different views of development – some welcome it; some recognize 
how tourism brings negative impacts (“Anywhere the money is, men come 
with their violence .... Badness might come here, too” [p. 90].)

Meanwhile, Waters discovers that members of the Port Royal commu-

nity know little of their own history; interestingly, they also identify with a 
colonial view of their town’s story. “What was unexpected was the extent to 
which Afro-Jamaican Port Royalists embrace the Anglocentric narrative. It 
seems to offer them a way of drawing distinctions between themselves and 
other Kingstonians” (p. 103). Such conflict of interests and narratives among 
the players is one reason why Port Royal is still living in the shadows of its 
past, its population the victims of their own – and other people’s – consider-
ations of history. 

Waters’s book is dogged by a style that suggests an anxious essay writer 

prone to throwing information at the reader for fear of leaving something out. 
It is also annoyingly repetitive; and there’s no map. Yet this is a book that 
addresses important themes: it does so with enthusiasm and uncovers some 
revealing insights central to the development of Jamaican (if not Caribbean) 
identity along the way.

The American Discovery of Europe. JaCk d. fORbEs. Urbana: University of 
Illinois Press, 2007. xii + 251 pp. (Cloth US$ 34.95)

bUCk WOOdaRd
Department of Anthropology
College of William & Mary
Williamsburg VA 23187, U.S.A.
<bwwood@wm.edu>

A departure from Jack Forbes’s earlier works on race and ethnic identity 
(e.g., Forbes 1993), this new book offers evidence of transatlantic voyages 
by native peoples of the Americas prior to 1492. The American Discovery 
of Europe is dedicated to challenging the historical interpretations of the 
intercontinental exchange between the Old and New Worlds, and indeed to 
questioning the concepts associated with “discovery” and defining the per-
spectivality of “Old” and “New.” While it argues for revisions of accepted 

historical canons, it is apt to remain, like Forbes’s early studies of marginal 
peoples, on the periphery of academic discourse. 

During a period when new ideas are continuing to surface and evidence 

mounts for a longer indigenous occupation of the Western Hemisphere, 
Forbes’s book enters into the debate with a surprising amount of documen-
tary and archaeological concurrence. From Caribbean maritime traditions to 
Greenlandic voyagers, it weaves nautical and botanical knowledge alongside 
recovered artifacts of seemingly bizarre placement. Translated obscure pri-
mary documents form testimonies of “Indians” visiting the coasts of Ireland, 
Norway, and France in boats made from either skin or dugout logs. 

While engaging for the reader, Forbes’s argument does little to address 

the wider impact of these Atlantic exchanges. More than likely, this absence 
is due to what most scholars have already concluded; occasional and inter-
mittent contact did occur between the “Old” and “New” World, but these 
interactions had little lasting effect on culture and were not sustainable. 
Admittedly, Forbes acknowledges that the majority of American “discover-
ies” are the result of forced landings from Atlantic storm systems, captives 
of long-range European fishing excursions, and contact with sparse human 
settlements along the edges of the Arctic. He fails to consider the relative 
size of the world prior to the emergence of a global system. Communication 
across a half dozen European languages, the lack of general literacy among 
the populace, and the instability of feudal Europe did not provide a uniform 
understanding of the globe or the climate for exploration beyond the limits 
of the “known” Old World. Equally, the examples presented suggest that 
voyages by American Indians occurred in a single direction, thereby limiting 
the diffusion of knowledge from one side of the Atlantic to the other. In turn, 
the amount of “discovery” that could result in large-scale cultural change or 
reverse exploration from the Americas to Europe was equally limited. Simply 
put, there is evidence to indicate that there were multiple cross-Atlantic con-
tacts between the Old and New World, but that testimony does little to alter 
our present understandings of human history or to reveal mechanisms that 
shaped cultures experiencing contact phenomena prior to the cataclysmic 
events surrounding 1492. 

Forbes is far-reaching in his assertions and hypotheses of continental 

exchange, often overlooking more conventional explanations for the offered 
evidence of genetic variation and anomalous archaeological findings. One 
such example centers on the presence of several Inuit bone harpoon points 
found along the western beaches of Ireland and Scotland. Forbes views these 
rare occurrences as archaeological evidence for an Inuit presence in Western 
Europe prior to 1200 A.D., but neglects to consider the numerous ways in 
which this deposition may have taken place. Ignoring his earlier arguments 
about the power and force of eastwardly moving currents that placed botani-
cal drift from America along the shores of Europe’s Atlantic coast, Forbes 

never considers the possibility of expired, beached, or wounded mammals 
from Inuit waters depositing both carcass and points at the edge of the 
Atlantic’s eastern drift. While minor to the overall presentation, cases such as 
this, and far-reaching evidence for American Indian presence in Europe (i.e., 
Indians of the Roman or Medieval era) detract from The American Discovery 
of Europe’s stronger arguments and cast an unfortunate shadow on an other-
wise engaging ethnohistory. 

In contrast to the focus on the possibility of American Indian “discovery” of 

Europe, the book’s stronger suit deals with the relatively unknown nautical tra-
ditions of the Atlantic Americas. Forbes offers examples of primary documents 
describing the various forms of Caribbean, South American, and Northeastern 
vessel types and indigenous knowledge of wind and currents as well as an 
overview of native material culture associated with seamanship, actually filling 
a void in the current scholarship on hemispheric maritime practices. 

More valuable are the references to numerous Italian, French, Spanish, 

and Portuguese primary documents. The book’s strongest sections translate 
Columbian writings and obscure Scandinavian references, and they chronicle 
the movements of peoples through the waters of the Pre-Columbian Caribbean 
and among Newfoundland, Greenland, and Iceland in the North Atlantic. 

Ultimately, Forbes hopes The American Discovery of Europe will “forever 

change the way history of the Americas is defined and taught” (Forbes 2007). 
He attempts to resituate the concept of “discovery,” challenging readers to con-
sider indigenous engagement and agency before and during the emergence of 
a global system. His book adds to the ongoing dialogue on the human expe-
rience and the events that foreground the beginning of colonial encounters. 
Unfortunately challenging notions of “discovery” will probably remain too 
unconventional and obscure to become the legacy that Forbes hopes.

REfEREnCEs

fORbEs, JaCk d., 1993. Africans and Native Americans: The Language of Race and the 
Evolution of Red-Black Peoples. Chicago: University of Illinois Press.

—, 2007. Did American Indians Discover Europe Long before Columbus? http://www.
tonatierra.org/nauacalli.html

Reading Erna Brodber: Uniting the Black Diaspora through Folk Culture 
and Religion. JUnE E. RObERTs. Westport CT: Praeger, 2006. xiv + 278 pp. 
(Cloth US$ 94.95)

bénédiCTE LEdEnT
Department of English
University of Liège
B-4000 Liège, Belgium
<b.ledent@ulg.ac.be>

In her recent Twentieth-Century Caribbean Literature: Critical Moments in 
Anglophone Literary History, Alison Donnell deplores the critical neglect of 
the writers “who retained an island base in terms of the focus of their work” 
(2006:86), Jamaican Erna Brodber among them. As the first book-length study 
of this major literary voice, June E. Roberts’s Reading Erna Brodber is a wel-
come addition to the field of Caribbean literary criticism. The purpose of this 
dense, occasionally abstruse volume is to demonstrate the aesthetic and ideo-
logical originality of a writer who is not only “engaged in the act of redefining 
the novel” (p. xii) but, as a radical “intellectual worker” (p. ix), has also devel-
oped her own folk-based approach to the Caribbean diasporic discourse. 

This book is organized in two sections. The first one, made up of five 

chapters, is devoted to an extensive contextualization of Brodber’s work. It 
examines its revisionism in relation to the tradition of Caribbean literature 
as a whole, in particular that of women writers, and illuminates the inter-
disciplinary nature of Brodber’s writing by focusing on the movements that 
have shaped it, especially Rastafarianism, black nationalism, and African 
spirituality. The argument throughout is that Brodber’s unique, revolution-
ary aesthetic is informed by an indigenous folk culture which needs to be 
taken into account if one wants to fully understand the writer’s fictions. 
Nevertheless, insightful and well informed as it may be, Roberts’s attempt 
to depict Brodber’s intellectual background is only partly successful, for her 
account tends to be repetitive and to lack clarity, not only because of a refusal 
to simplify the Jamaican writer’s complex agenda. In addition, if Reading 
Erna Brodber provides an informative overview of Caribbean literature and 
of Brodber’s place in it, it also contains inaccuracies – for example, when it 
lists Caryl Phillips among women writers on p. 36 (while describing him as a 
male writer on p. 50) or when, on p. 52, it says that Myal won the “esteemed 
Booker Prize for literature” (it was the Caribbean and Canadian Regional 
Winner in the 1989 Commonwealth Writers’ Prize).

The second part of the book, comprising eight chapters, provides closer 

readings of Brodber’s fiction, Jane and Louisa Will Soon Come Home (1980), 

Myal (1988), and Louisiana (1994), three nonlinear novels which “attempt to 
create a new social history of the Caribbean experience” (p. 126). The first 
one, originally meant as a case study for Jamaican social workers, drama-
tizes the spiritual healing of Nellie, a young middle-class Jamaican of mixed 
ancestry suffering from cultural schizophrenia, and celebrates the crucial role 
played by black vernacular culture, including orality, in the construction of 
“a healthy diasporan identity” (pp. 100-101). However, Jane and Louisa can 
also be read, Roberts points out, as a political allegory of a nation which 
needs to overcome its Manichean social system and as an engagement on 
Brodber’s part with the 1968 Walter Rodney affair. Roberts further surveys 
Brodber’s methodological choices, which are meant to “achieve communal-
ism” (p. 90), and dwells in particular on the symbol of the kumbla, an ambig-
uous trope, both prison and cocoon, and on Brodber’s allusive prose which 
refers, as in the title, to a traditional ring game, but also to Lewis Carroll’s 
Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland and to Zora Neale Hurston, a major influ-
ence on Brodber. Reading Myal requires a good knowledge of the Afro-based 
religious system that developed in Jamaica in the wake of slavery. Roberts 
therefore explains at length the “dialectical tension between good and evil” 
(p. 144), between Myalism and Obeah, that affects the spiritual awakening 
in the 1920s of Brodber’s heroine Ella, the victim of colonial and patriarchal 
“spirit thievery,” who is eventually rescued by a group of black and white 
Myalists who communicate telepathically. Roberts’s extensive discussion of 
the novel also includes a focus on its secondary plot, Anita’s story of rape and 
incest, on the functional role of this novel as an incentive to revise Jamaica’s 
educational system, and, interestingly if more marginally, on the similarities 
between Ella’s background and Bob Marley’s. If in Myal Brodber already 
brings the Caribbean and African-American diasporas together through its 
heroine’s experience of passing, it is in Louisiana, however, that she fully 
develops this fruitful parallelism, focusing this time on another aspect of 
African religiosity, spirit possession. This third novel focuses on a young 
anthropologist, first called Ella then Louisiana, who ends up a conduit for 
two dead Garveyites, Louise and Anna, two “cross-diasporic spirit sisters” 
(p. 238). Roberts reads Louisiana as an “allegorical revision” (p. 223) of 
the life of Zola Neale Hurston, both a writer and a researcher interested in 
African diasporic folklore, like Brodber herself, and she devotes many pages 
to arguing this comparison. She also demonstrates that the novel promotes 
a “decolonization of anthropology” (p. 264) at the same time as it operates 
a conciliatory reunification of various currents of diasporic thought, chiefly 
represented by Marcus Garvey and W.E.B. Du Bois. 

The strong point of this otherwise loosely argued study – which also con-

tains several irritating typos – is the way in which it illuminates the “cultural 
tapestry” (p. 212) woven by Brodber’s fiction. Reading Erna Brodber is also 
impressively wide-ranging. Yet it is to be regretted that it does not include 

Brodber’s 2003 collection of lectures, The Continent of Black Consciousness, 
a book that constitutes an interesting complement to the fiction of a truly 
remarkable writer.

REfEREnCEs

bROdbER, ERna, 2003. The Continent of Black Consciousness: On the History of the 
African Diaspora from Slavery to the Present Day. London: New Beacon Books.

dOnnELL, aLisOn, 2006. Twentieth-Century Caribbean Literature: Critical Moments in 
Anglophone Literary History. London: Routledge.

Race, Culture, and Identity: Francophone West African and Caribbean 
Literature and Theory from Négritude to Créolité. sHiREEn k. LEWis. New 
York: Lexington Books, 2006. xx + 167 pp. (Paper US$ 25.95)

JaCqUELinE COUTi
Department of French Language and Culture
University of Virginia
Charlottesville VA 22004, U.S.A.
<jc8fc@virginia.edu>

Race, Culture, and Identity: Francophone West African and Caribbean 
Literature and Theory from Négritude to Créolité is an ambitious endeavor. As 
Shireen K. Lewis indicates, her book is “the first comprehensive study to date 
to map literary and theoretical discourse by Francophone intellectuals associ-
ated with Négritude (Léon Damas, Léopold Senghor, Aimé Césaire, Paulette 
Nardal), Antillanité (Edouard Glissant), Créolité (Jean Bernabé, Raphaël 
Confiant, Patrick Chamoiseau)” (p. xii). She situates her diachronic analysis 
in the larger debate around modernism and postmodernism in order to trace 
the varying identitarian shifts within French West Indian literature. Lewis 
examines these shifts as they evolve from a concern with African origins and 
racial and cultural purity toward a preoccupation with creolization, hybrid-
ity, and fragmentation, arguing for the inclusion of female Martiniquan intel-
lectuals as significant participants in the birth of modern black Francophone 
and Caribbean literature. Doing so, she claims that she is “the first scholar to 
conceptualize black women’s relationship to Négritude” (p. xv).

 Chapter 1 presents the sole issue of légitime défense as the guiding 

manifesto for nine young Marxist-Leninist and surrealist Martiniquans and 
argues that it represents a flawed precursor to Césaire’s Négritude. Lewis 
contextualizes their cultural project within French modernism and argues 
that Martiniquan students of the time, despite their anticolonial stance and 
attack against the mimetic writing of most French West Indians, did not 
themselves create a poetry that was rooted in black experience or Creole 
culture. Ironically, while engaging in their own type of imitation, they merely 
reproduced the surrealist genre.

In Chapter 2, Lewis reads Négritude not only as an attempt to assert a 

modern black subjectivity, but also as the expression of modernism itself by 
black subjects in a colonized world. She argues that modernism influenced 
the Négritude poets who in turn contributed to its development. Lewis pro-
vides a close reading of several poems from Damas, Senghor, and Césaire in 
order to present “alienation, fragmentation, and disintegration” as modernist 
themes that pervade Négritude poetry during the interwar period (p. 30). And 
she emphasizes that while Négritude encompassed the Francophone black 
world as a whole, much of the creative force at play in this project came from 
the French Caribbean.

Chapter 3 explores a biography of Paulette Nardal in order to examine the 

ways in which gender shaped the Négritude movement. Presenting a substan-
tial historical contextualization of the French Caribbean community in Paris, 
Lewis affirms that Nardal and her sister Jane blazed the trail for Senghor 
and Césaire. Indeed, she argues, Nardal’s essays and translations of Harlem 
Renaissance writers introduced Césaire and Senghor to ideas they would 
later develop in their movement.

In Chapter 4, Lewis explores the work of Edouard Glissant and the theo-

retical models he developed, which influenced the creolists, particularly the 
questioning of historical knowledge. In doing so, she perceives Glissant’s 
notion of Antillanité as a bridge between Négritude and Créolité. In her 
attempt to historicize the local and the peripheral and to acknowledge the 
fragmentation of past events in her examination of Glissant’s postmodernist 
concerns, she glosses over his concepts of creolization and chaos-world.

In Chapter 5, Lewis contends that in using Négritude as the foil for their 

own aesthetics of Créolité, the créolistes inadvertently contribute to the rel-
evance and revival of the declining Négritude project. She provides a his-
torical contextualization of the créolistes’ movement, which she dates from 
the creation of the GEREC (Groupe d’Etudes et de Recherche en Espace 
Créolophone) in the1970s, foregrounding the role of Jean Bernabé in the 
cultural and political debates concerning the creole language.

The broad scope of Lewis’s study might disappoint some readers, par-

ticularly African specialists. Indeed, despite its title, it mainly deals with 
French Caribbean theory. Additionally, although she discusses Négritude 

and Créolité as two antithetical movements, she does not delve into the dif-
ferences between the approaches of Césaire and Senghor, nor does she con-
textualize the backgrounds of these two writers. These authors share a desire 
to construct an Afrocentric identity within a French colonial field, but they 
are rooted in radically different sociopolitical contexts. The political and cul-
tural stakes of the Négritude project in an African society are very different 
from those in a French overseas department. Equally problematic is Lewis’s 
lack of attention to the political and racial complexity of the French Antilles, 
which leads to a simplification of key concepts such as Glissant’s notion of 
creolization. This prevents the nonspecialist reader from realizing how this 
sociopolitical context influences French Caribbean writers. Although Lewis 
does a thorough job of framing them within the context of France, she glosses 
over the context of their homeland. Finally, her survey of the field of French 
Caribbean literature is spotty. Striking examples of this include the omission 
of Suzanne Césaire among Lewis’s “women of Négritude” and the lack of 
engagement with important scholarship by Brent Hayes Edwards (2003) and 
Denean Sharpley-Whiting (2002). 

Despite some debatable claims and omissions (which are inherent to a 

project of this scale), Lewis’s book contributes to a rethinking of traditional 
concepts within Francophone literature. In a predominantly Anglocentric 
field, her project is successful in its goal of moving away from “treating 
Francophone literature as introductory or presenting it in terms of a survey” 
(p. xiii) by introducing French Caribbean intellectuals as key agents in the 
devel opment of a black modern subjectivity. And it makes an important con-
tribution to the literature on Négritude by highlighting the contributions of 
female writers such as Martiniquan Paulette Nardal.

REfEREnCEs

EdWaRds, bREnT HayEs, 2003. The Practice of Diaspora: Literature, Translation, and 
the Rise of Black Internationalism. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.

sHaRPLEy-WHiTinG, T. dEnEan, 2002. Negritude Women. Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press.

Autofiction and Advocacy in the Francophone Caribbean. REnéE LaRRiER. 
Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2006. x + 186 pp. (Cloth US$ 
59.95) 

RObERTO sTROnGMan 
Department of Black Studies
University of California
Santa Barbara CA 93106-3150, U.S.A.
<rstrongman@blackstudies.ucsb.edu>

Autofiction and Advocacy in the Francophone Caribbean utilizes Danmyé, the 
Martiniquan tradition of dance combat, as a leitmotif structuring a discussion 
on Caribbean subjectivity in novels by Joseph Zobel, Patrick Chamoiseau, 
Gisèle Pineau, Edwidge Danticat, and Maryse Condé. Renée Larrier repro-
duces the aesthetics of this simulated fight between two men as she wrestles 
with the role of advocacy in the genre of Caribbean autobiographical fiction 
she calls “autofiction,” following on work by Serge Doubrovsky. Bridging 
the gap between literary and dance criticism, she studies how the careful dis-
cursive choreography of these Caribbean novels can be understood through 
“the combat dance’s principles of narration, initiation, resistance, confronta-
tion, interaction, surprise, anticipation, improvisation, resistance, positional-
ity, displacement, balance, and negotiation” (p. 6). The two combatants and 
the ring of clapping and drumming spectators that surround them provide 
Larrier with a rich metanarrative to understand the vigorous and often con-
testatory nature of cultural production and reception in the Caribbean. 

Chapter 1 looks at the way in which the character of José in Zobel’s La 

Rue Cases-Nègres challenges the silences of master narratives that refuse 
to acknowledge the brutality of French colonization in the Antilles. Like a 
Danmyé master, José – as author and protagonist of the text – “lands on his 
feet” as he succeeds at establishing this counter-discourse. Larrier then moves 
on, in Chapter 2, to explore the collective ethos of the Danmyé through the 
interaction of author, narrators, and protagonists in seven novels by Patrick 
Chamoiseau. Here, she studies how the role of the encircling chanting chorus 
of the fight, the répondé, help to advance and define the course of the narra-
tion in Chronique des sept misères, Antan d’enfance, Chemin-d’école, Solibo 
Magnifique, Texaco, A bout d’enfance, and Biblique des derniers gestes. 

The remaining three chapters explore novels by women from Guadaloupe 

and Haiti. The role of female resistance to patriarchal oppression in Gisèle 
Pineau’s autofiction is the subject of Chapter 3. Larrier interprets the role of 
the encircling spectators of the fight as the community of characters surround-
ing the main protagonists in Délivrance, L’Exil selon Julia, and L’Espérance-

macadam. In this last novel, the tragedy engendered by Rosette’s inability to 
believe that her husband abused their teenage daughter Angela speaks to the 
need of those surrounding the colonial and gendered struggle to support the 
oppressed warrior. In Chapter 4, Larrier analyzes the character of Amabelle 
Désir in Edwidge Danticat’s The Farming of the Bones as a Danmyé fighter 
who overcomes obstacles, crosses borders, and builds new communities, rein-
scribing the diasporic odysseys of many Caribbean writers. As refreshing as it 
is to see Haitian literature studied as Francophone, one wonders how this par-
adigm limits the possibilities of analyzing relevant works written in Haitian 
Creole. With respect to Martiniquan Creole, Larrier displays great inconsis-
tency and frequently defers to French terminology. For example, she chooses 
répondeurs over répondé and Laghia de la Mort over Ladjialamò. Chapter 
5 deploys the metaphor of the Danmyé to understand the multiple narrative 
positionalities in the work of Maryse Condé. By cataloguing Condé’s novels 
as first-person novels (Moi, Tituba and La Vie sclérélate), third-person novels 
(Ségou and La Belle Créole), and multivoiced texts (Traversée de la man-
grove, Histoire de la femme cannibale), Larrier constructs a shifting meta-
critical narrator in the midst of an entourage of onlookers who provide com-
peting, and often questionable, interpretations of the narrative struggle. 

Throughout the elegantly interlaced chapters, Larrier stitches the provoca-

tive, yet ultimately undeveloped notion of Collages text[îles] in an attempt 
to present how the reappraisal of Caribbean identity in the novels she exam-
ines is founded on the deep commitment and advocacy that their authors have 
for their respective Caribbean homelands. While Larrier successfully under-
scores several of the authors’ activist roles in favor of education, freedom of 
expression, and other social justice causes, the full deployment of Collages 
Text[îles] remains unexplored. As a term borrowed from Guadeloupean 
painter Franceline Dawkins, whose work graces the cover of Gisèle Pineau’s 
L’Espérance–macadam, Collages Text[îles] embodies a strong sense of female 
solidarity across artistic media that could redefine traditional women’s work 
into a form of gendered agency capable of effectively overcoming patriarchal 
oppression in the literary realm. More importantly, Larrier misses the oppor-
tunity to deploy the Caribbean feminist discursive needlework of Collages 
Text[îles] to counterbalance the strong masculinism of the Danmyé fight. 

Larrier’s broad knowledge of Caribbean popular culture and critical theory 

enables her to foresee how projecting First World theoretical paradigms onto 
the area would add to an already long list of political, military, and cultural 
impositions. Believing that Caribbean cultural products can break open their 
own shell from within, she re-interprets performativity as a creolized Caribbean 
aesthetic. This exempts her from the need to cite the work of Judith Butler, 
Joseph Roach, Victor Turner, and Richard Schechner, leading North American 
academics in the field of performance studies. Her critical boldness brilliantly 
re-enacts the very resistance of the Martiniquan dance combat leitmotif.

While Larrier’s critical understanding of Francophone Caribbean autobio-

graphical fiction is superb and ensures a well-focused argument, one wonders 
how the argument could have been strengthened through a sustained engage-
ment with literary, choreographical, and pugilistic traditions in other territories 
and linguistic traditions of the greater Caribbean. As it is, Larrier’s newest work 
marks a bold step in the development of a truly interdisciplinary and compara-
tive understanding of life-narration and performance in the Caribbean. 

Patrick Chamoiseau: Espaces d’une écriture antillaise. LORna MiLnE. 
Amsterdam & New York: Rodopi, 2006. 226 pp. (Paper US$ 62.00)

PaTRiCia kRUs
School of Languages, Cultures and Religions
University of Stirling
Stirling FK9 4LA, Scotland
<pmkrus@yahoo.com>

Martiniquan writer and essayist Patrick Chamoiseau gained international 
recognition with the bilingual edition of Eloge de la Créolité/ In Praise of 
Creoleness, cowritten with Jean Bernabé and Raphaël Confiant. This essay 
gave a prominent place to the Creole language of the French Antilles in the 
construction and definition of the islands’ cultural identity and made two 
of its authors, Confiant and Chamoiseau, figureheads of the Créolité move-
ment. Given the strong emphasis placed on Creole by the créolistes writers 
(which also includes Gisèle Pineau), critical assessments of Chamoiseau’s 
work have interpreted his writing in the light of his own essays on language 
and identity. Lorna Milne’s monograph seeks to redress the balance and 
rests on the valid observation that the geographic and topographic elements 
understood to both symbolize and contribute to the formation of Antillean 
identity have so far been overlooked. Milne’s study is then an exploration 
of the symbolic value of space in the development of identity and history 
in Chamoiseau’s narrative fiction. The monograph looks at how imagined 
representations of real, tangible spaces are transformed into imaginary liter-
ary spaces, a process through which, she argues, aesthetic representation and 
lived experience can converge. 

Three main strands – space, history, and identity – run through Milne’s 

analysis, and these are linked ultimately to a fourth idea: the question of the 
role of the writer and of the creative process in the construction of identity in 

a postcolonial context. The starting point lies in Chamoiseau’s own critical 
writing, and in particular his essay Ecrire en pays dominé, which presents 
the island of Martinique as a subordinated space under French economic, 
political, and cultural domination. Opening with a chapter that outlines the 
role of space in the forging of the community’s identity, the analysis places 
Chamoiseau’s representation of Martiniquan identity within the wider con-
text of Caribbean discourses on cultural identity, mainly through the essays 
of Antonio Benítez-Rojo and Edouard Glissant. In Ecrire en pays dominé, 
Chamoiseau underscores the need for Martiniquans to differentiate them-
selves from a dominating French identity and develop community through a 
foundational event, which Milne identifies as the Middle Passage. 

Chapters 2-5 look at the affirmation of identity through an in-depth analy-

sis of four key spaces in Chamoiseau’s imaginary which are embedded in the 
history of Martinique: the hold of slave ships, the market, the Creole habitat, 
and the forest. The hold of the slave ship is seen as the site of origin (or espace 
d’origine) (p. 37) in Chamoiseau’s writing. Milne demonstrates how it serves 
as communal site of experience not only for descendents of slaves but also 
for other Caribbean ethnic and racial groups. Displacement is viewed as an 
initiation, a passage from one place, one history, and one identity to another. 
The originality of Milne’s analysis of the symbolism of the hold lies in her per-
ception of this particular space as a dual sign in Chamoiseau’s fiction: a void 
which strips those who traverse it from their origin – and by extension their 
original history and identity – yet also a uterine space which serves as the cata-
lyst for the construction of a new history and identity. Chapter 3 explores the 
aesthetic representation of the traditional Creole market which in the contem-
porary Caribbean is gradually losing its social function as a place of commu-
nication and exchange. Although Chamoiseau’s portrayal of the market could 
be interpreted as distorted and nostalgic, Milne argues that his imagery of the 
market space contributes to the transmission of the past to a new generation 
of readers. It then becomes a model for future generations and helps them to 
relate to the space they inhabit. The following chapters focus on constructed 
spaces (the Creole habitat) and natural places (the woods). Chapter 4 discusses 
how the Creole habitat, and in particular the quartier, a fragile Creole entity in 
Texaco, is also a place of physical and cultural struggle between (post)colonial 
authorities and the ordinary people. Chapter 5 looks at quest and transforma-
tion through the trope of the woods, les bois, a liminal space beyond the plan-
tation’s domination. The forest symbolizes the rejection of slavery and allows 
for the transformation and affirmation of a Creole identity. At the same time, 
Milne shows that Chamoiseau’s images of the woods highlight their function 
as a site of encounter and rapprochement between békés and Creoles, espe-
cially in her reading of L’esclave vieil homme et le molosse. 

Important aspects of Milne’s analysis are, on the one hand, the constant 

links made between Chamoiseau’s critical writing and his fiction, and, on the 

other hand, the attention given to his reflections on the creative process and 
the role of the writer. She concludes that Chamoiseau’s own novels illustrate 
both the creative and political limits and the possibilities of fiction. Writing 
has what Milne terms nature mortifère, a deadly nature that suppresses oral-
ity and crystallizes the representation of a world otherwise too unpredictable 
and subject to change to be fully grasped symbolically. But writing also has a 
political and aesthetic function: it promotes one’s own values and recognizes 
the existence of alternative values. 

Milne’s book includes a useful glossary of Creole words and expressions. 

It also provides an exhaustive and detailed examination of both Chamoiseau’s 
critical and creative writing by looking at the development of the themes of 
identity and history through the symbolic representation of space. The book 
shows the evolution of Chamoiseau’s poetics in his fiction which, despite 
being labeled “magic realist,” has received little scrutiny.

REfEREnCE

bERnabé, JEan, PaTRiCk CHaMOissEaU & RaPHaëL COnfianT, 1989. Eloge de la 
Créolité/In Praise of Creoleness. Paris: Gallimard.

