Rosemary’s Baby

By Ira Levin:
 

Novels

 
SON OF ROSEMARY

 
SLIVER

 
THE BOYS FROM BRAZIL

 
THE STEPFORD WIVES

 
THIS PERFECT DAY

 
ROSEMARY’S BABY

 
A KISS BEFORE DYING

 
DRAT! THE CAT! (Music by Milton Schafer)

 
CRITIC’S CHOICE

 
GENERAL SEEGER

 
INTERLOCK

 
NO TIME FOR SERGEANTS (From the novel by Mac Hyman)

Rosemary’s Baby

IRA LEVIN

NEW YORK

ROSEMARY’S BABY

Pegasus Books LLC

 
80 Broad Street

 
5th Floor

 
New York, NY 10004

Copyright © 1967 by Ira Levin

 
Introduction copyright © 2010 by Otto Penzler

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in whole or in
part without written permission from the publisher, except by reviewers
who may quote brief excerpts in connection with a review in a newspaper,
magazine, or electronic publication; nor may any part of this book be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by
any means electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or other,
without written permission from the publisher.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available.

ISBN: 978-1-605-98148-2

www.pegasusbooks.us

COMPLETED IN AUGUST, 1966,

 
IN WILTON, CONNECTICUT,

 
AND DEDICATED TO GABRIELLE

Contents

CHAPTER 1

CHAPTER 2

CHAPTER 3

CHAPTER 4

CHAPTER 5

CHAPTER 6

CHAPTER 7

CHAPTER 8

CHAPTER 9

CHAPTER 10

CHAPTER 1

CHAPTER 2

CHAPTER 3

CHAPTER 4

CHAPTER 5

CHAPTER 6

CHAPTER 7

CHAPTER 8

CHAPTER 9

CHAPTER 10

CHAPTER 1

CHAPTER 2
 

INTRODUCTION

“It’s one thing to refer to the book,” Levin wrote of Rosemary’s Baby,

“as being ‘generally credited or blamed for having sparked the current
revival of occultism,’ and another to recognize, as I have in the past few
years (writing in 1990), that the blame may be real and weighty.”

The preponderance of horror in fiction and on film led to a time, Levin

noted, “when people, presumably schooled, detect backward demonic
messages in rock music and Satan’s symbol on bars of soap.”

Levin was not a believer—not in any organized religion, not Satanism,

not witchcraft, not in any of the myths or charismatic real-life figures who
have engendered worship. In fact, he had rather hoped that his novel would
help to increase the skepticism that had always resided with him. It wasn’t
to be. Not only did the book become a publishing phenomenon, rushing to
the top of best-seller lists, but it was the basis for a faithful motion picture
version that also was a staggering success at the box office and one of the
few horror films of the 1960s that holds up to repeated viewing, even today.

Hollywood directors are famous for signing on to make a motion

picture based on a novel and then changing it so dramatically that even the
author wouldn’t recognize it. This was not the case with Roman Polanski,
who was almost obsessive about following the author’s story. He met
regularly with Levin, pages marked in the book, asking such questions as,
What do you think is the color of Rosemary’s dress in this scene? and What
is the date of the issue of The New Yorker in which Guy Woodhouse sees a
shirt he wants?—all very flattering to the author, who had no idea how to
answer. It was uncommonly wise of the director, who also wrote the
screenplay for the 1968 masterpiece starring Mia Farrow as the young
woman who slowly becomes convinced that her husband (John Cassavetes)
has become involved with a coven of witches who live in their apartment
building.

Ira Levin (1929–2007) was the genius whose brilliant first novel, A Kiss

Before Dying (1953), won the Edgar Allan Poe Award from the Mystery
Writers of America in the Best First Novel category. Never a prolific
novelist, his next novel was Rosemary’s Baby (1967), which he followed
with the dystopian science fiction thriller This Perfect Day (1970). He then
added a phrase to the language with The Stepford Wives (1972) before
writing the huge best-seller, The Boys from Brazil (1976), then concluded
his novel-writing career with two less well-regarded books, Sliver (1991)
and Son of Rosemary (1997). All but This Perfect Day and Son of Rosemary
have been filmed at least once.

Levin’s success as a playwright equaled or exceeded that of his books,

notably his adaptation of Mac Hyman’s No Time for Sergeants to the stage
in 1955; it starred Andy Griffith, launching his career. He also wrote the
book and lyrics for the musical Drat! The Cat! (1965). But it is his 1978
tour-de-force, Deathtrap, that brought him his greatest acclaim. It was
nominated for a Tony and won the Edgar, becoming the all-time longest
running thriller in the history of the American theater, with 1,809
performances over a four-and-a-half-year period.

What a career! At the age of 23, while most recent college graduates are

still living at home and trying to figure out what they want to do, Levin had
written one of the greatest mystery novels of all time. A couple of years
later, he had a hit Broadway play. He wrote the lyrics for one of Barbra
Streisand’s signature songs, “He Touched Me.” After some television work

(Lights Out, The U.S. Steel Hour), he had another hit on Broadway, and
then the horror novel to end all horror novels. He wasn’t yet forty.

Although somewhat reclusive in later life, Ira Levin was, perhaps

contrary to expectation, a delightful companion who loved to laugh and
hear other people’s stories. We happened to be at the same Christmas party
one year and he was as genial as could be. But he was also a little troubled.
The party was at the home of America’s greatest comic crime novelist,
Donald E. Westlake, and, not surprisingly, there were many authors and
book people in the room. It had been almost fifteen years since he had
written The Boys from Brazil and he said he felt like a fraud, that he was
listening to conversations and realized that everyone else had books
recently published or books on which they were working. He went home
and wrote Sliver in a few months and, as was usual for him, it hit the best-
seller lists.

He should have realized that he was not a fraud, not for an instant, and

that no one sane could ever have thought he was. He wrote brilliantly in
every literary field in which he worked, his sentences models of precision,
making up what they lacked in velvety, mandarin, overripe prose with
clarity and forward movement, with never a wasted word. He was justly
proud of his achievements—except, perhaps, in the case of Rosemary’s
Baby, because of the books and films by others for which it had been a
catalyst. He once wrote that he regarded his novel the way he might have
felt about “an offspring who regularly sent home money that I’d begun to
suspect was ill-gotten.” He was dismayed that “it helped boost the universal
stupidity quotient.” But, like that hypothetical offspring’s offerings, he
never felt compelled to send back the money. Nor should he have. He
enriched those readers fortunate enough to have picked up this perfect
classic, and we would never give back the experience.

PART 1

Guy relayed the news to Rosemary, stopping the phone against his

chest. Rosemary groaned “Oh no!” and looked as if she would weep.

“It’s too late,” Guy said to the phone. “We signed a lease yesterday.”

Rosemary caught his arm. “Couldn’t we get out of it?” she asked him. “Tell
them something?”

“Hold on a minute, will you, Mrs. Cortez?” Guy stopped the phone

again. “Tell them what?” he asked.

Rosemary floundered and raised her hands helplessly. “I don’t know,

the truth. That we have a chance to get into the Bramford.”

“Honey,” Guy said, “they’re not going to care about that.”
“You’ll think of something, Guy. Let’s just look, all right? Tell her we’ll

look. Please. Before she hangs up.”

“We signed a lease, Ro; we’re stuck.”
“Please! She’ll hang up!” Whimpering with mock anguish, Rosemary

pried the phone from Guy’s chest and tried to push it up to his mouth.

there’s a chance we’ll be able to get out of it, because we haven’t signed the
actual lease yet. They were out of the forms so we only signed a letter of
agreement. Can we take a look at the apartment?”

Mrs. Cortez gave instructions: they were to go to the Bramford between

eleven and eleven-thirty, find Mr. Micklas or Jerome, and tell whichever
they found that they were the party she had sent to look at 7E. Then they
were to call her. She gave Guy her number.

“You see how you can think of things?” Rosemary said, putting Peds

and yellow shoes on her feet. “You’re a marvelous liar.”

Guy, at the mirror, said, “Christ, a pimple.”
“Don’t squeeze it.”
“It’s only four rooms, you know. No nursery.”
“I’d rather have four rooms in the Bramford,” Rosemary said, “than a

whole floor in that—that white cellblock.”

“Yesterday you loved it.”
“I liked it. I never loved it. I’ll bet not even the architect loves it. We’ll

make a dining area in the living room and have a beautiful nursery, when
and if.”

“Soon,” Guy said. He ran an electric razor back and forth across his

upper lip, looking into his eyes, which were brown and large. Rosemary
stepped into a yellow dress and squirmed the zipper up the back of it.

They were in one room, that had been Guy’s bachelor apartment. It had

posters of Paris and Verona, a large day bed and a pullman kitchen.

It was Tuesday, the third of August.

“Let’s see,” Guy said. “I did Hamlet a while back, didn’t I, Liz? And

then we made The Sandpiper…”

Albatross and a lot of television plays and television commercials.”

“That’s where the money is, isn’t it?” Mr. Micklas said; “the

commercials.”

“Yes,” Rosemary said, and Guy said, “And the artistic thrill, too.”
Rosemary gave him a pleading look; he gave back one of stunned

innocence and then made a leering vampire face at the top of Mr. Micklas’s
head.

The elevator—oak-paneled, with a shining brass handrail all around—

was run by a uniformed Negro boy with a locked-in-place smile. “Seven,”
Mr. Micklas told him; to Rosemary and Guy he said, “This apartment has
four rooms, two baths, and five closets. Originally the house consisted of
very large apartments—the smallest was a nine—but now they’ve almost all
been broken up into fours, fives, and sixes. Seven E is a four that was
originally the back part of a ten. It has the original kitchen and master bath,
which are enormous, as you’ll soon see. It has the original master bedroom
for its living room, another bedroom for its bedroom, and two servant’s
rooms thrown together for its dining room or second bedroom. Do you have
children?”

“We plan to,” Rosemary said.
“It’s an ideal child’s room, with a full bathroom and a large closet. The

whole set-up is made to order for a young couple like yourselves.”

The elevator stopped and the Negro boy, smiling, chivied it down, up,

and down again for a closer alignment with the floor rail outside; and still
smiling, pulled in the brass inner gate and the outer rolling door. Mr.
Micklas stood aside and Rosemary and Guy stepped out—into a dimly
lighted hallway walled and carpeted in dark green. A workman at a
sculptured green door marked 7B looked at them and turned back to fitting
a peepscope into its cut-out hole.

Mr. Micklas led the way to the right and then to the left, through short

branches of dark green hallway. Rosemary and Guy, following, saw rubbed-
away places in the wallpaper and a seam where it had lifted and was curling
inward; saw a dead light bulb in a cut-glass sconce and a patched place of
light green tape on the dark green carpet. Guy looked at Rosemary: Patched
carpet? She looked away and smiled brightly: I love it; everything’s lovely!

back at them, “passed away only a few days ago and nothing has been
moved out of the apartment yet. Her son asked me to tell whoever looks at
it that the rugs, the air conditioners, and some of the furniture can be had
practically for the asking.” He turned into another branch of hallway
papered in newer-looking green and gold stripes.

“Did she die in the apartment?” Rosemary asked. “Not that it—”
“Oh, no, in a hospital,” Mr. Micklas said. “She’d been in a coma for

weeks. She was very old and passed away without ever waking. I’ll be
grateful to go that way myself when the time comes. She was chipper right
to the end; cooked her own meals, shopped the departments stores…She
was one of the first women lawyers in New York State.”

They came now to a stairwell that ended the hallway. Adjacent to it, on

the left, was the door of apartment 7E, a door without sculptured garlands,
narrower than the doors they had passed. Mr. Micklas pressed the pearl bell
button—L. Gardenia was mounted above it in white letters on black plastic
—and turned a key in the lock. Despite lost fingers he worked the knob and
threw the door smartly. “After you, please,” he said, leaning forward on his
toes and holding the door open with the length of an outstretched arm.

Opposite the kitchen was the dining room or second bedroom, which

Mrs. Gardenia had apparently used as a combination study and greenhouse.
Hundreds of small plants, dying and dead, stood on jerry-built shelves

under spirals of unlighted fluorescent tubing; in their midst a rolltop desk
spilled over with books and papers. A handsome desk it was, broad and
gleaming with age. Rosemary left Guy and Mr. Micklas talking by the door
and went to it, stepping over a shelf of withered brown fronds. Desks like
this were displayed in antique-store windows; Rosemary wondered,
touching it, if it was one of the things that could be had practically for the
asking. Graceful blue penmanship on mauve paper said than merely the
intriguing pastime I believed it to be. I can no longer associate myself—and
she caught herself snooping and looked up at Mr. Micklas turning from
Guy. “Is this desk one of the things Mrs. Gardenia’s son wants to sell?” she
asked.

“I don’t know,” Mr. Micklas said. “I could find out for you, though.”
“It’s a beauty,” Guy said.
Rosemary said “Isn’t it?” and smiling, looked about at walls and

windows. The room would accommodate almost perfectly the nursery she
had imagined. It was a bit dark—the windows faced on a narrow courtyard
—but the white-and-yellow wallpaper would brighten it tremendously. The
bathroom was small but a bonus, and the closet, filled with potted seedlings
that seemed to be doing quite well, was a good one.

They turned to the door, and Guy asked, “What are all these?”
“Herbs, mostly,” Rosemary said. “There’s mint and basil…I don’t know

what these are.”

Farther along the hallway there was a guest closet on the left, and then,

on the right, a wide archway opening onto the living room. Large bay
windows stood opposite, two of them, with diamond panes and three-sided
window seats. There was a small fireplace in the right-hand wall, with a
scrolled white marble mantel, and there were high oak bookshelves on the
left.

“Oh, Guy,” Rosemary said, finding his hand and squeezing it. Guy said

“Mm” noncommittally but squeezed back; Mr. Micklas was beside him.

“The fireplace works, of course,” Mr. Micklas said.
The bedroom, behind them, was adequate—about twelve by eighteen,

with its windows facing on the same narrow courtyard as those of the
dining-room-second-bedroom-nursery. The bathroom, beyond the living
room, was big, and full of bulbous white brass-knobbed fixtures.

She spun about with opened arms, as if to take and embrace it. “I love it!”

“What she’s trying to do,” Guy said, “is get you to lower the rent.”
Mr. Micklas smiled. “We would raise it if we were allowed,” he said.

“Beyond the fifteen-per-cent increase, I mean. Apartments with this kind of
charm and individuality are as rare as hen’s teeth today. The new—” He
stopped short, looking at a mahogany secretary at the head of the central
hallway. “That’s odd,” he said. “There’s a closet behind that secretary. I’m
sure there is. There are five: two in the bedroom, one in the second
bedroom, and two in the hallway, there and there.” He went closer to the
secretary.

Guy stood high on tiptoes and said, “You’re right. I can see the corners

of the door.”

She pointed to a peaked silhouette left ghost-like on the wall near the
bedroom door, and the deep prints of four ball feet in the burgundy carpet.
Faint scuff-trails curved and crossed from the four prints to the secretary’s
feet where they stood now against the narrow adjacent wall.

“Give me a hand, will you?” Mr. Micklas said to Guy.
Between them they worked the secretary bit by bit back toward its

original place. “I see why she went into a coma,” Guy said, pushing.

“She couldn’t have moved this by herself,” Mr. Micklas said; “she was

eighty-nine.”

Rosemary looked doubtfully at the closet door they had uncovered.

“Should we open it?” she asked. “Maybe her son should.”

The secretary lodged neatly in its four footprints. Mr. Micklas massaged

his fingers-missing hands. “I’m authorized to show the apartment,” he said,
and went to the door and opened it. The closet was nearly empty; a vacuum
cleaner stood at one side of it and three or four wood boards at the other.
The overhead shelf was stacked with blue and green bath towels.

“Whoever she locked in got out,” Guy said.
Mr. Micklas said, “She probably didn’t need five closets.”
“But why would she cover up her vacuum cleaner and her towels?”

Rosemary asked.

Mr. Micklas shrugged. “I don’t suppose we’ll ever know. She may have

been getting senile after all.” He smiled. “Is there anything else I can show

you or tell you?”

“Yes,” Rosemary said. “What about the laundry facilities? Are there

washing machines downstairs?”

“It’s cheaper than the other,” Rosemary said, trying to sound as if

practical considerations stood foremost in her mind.

“It’s one room less, honey,” Guy said.
Rosemary walked in silence for a moment, and then said, “It’s better

located.”

“God, yes,” Guy said. “I could walk to all the theaters.”
Heartened, Rosemary leaped from practicality. “Oh Guy, let’s take it!

Please! Please! It’s such a wonderful apartment! She didn’t do anything
with it, old Mrs. Gardenia! That living room could be—it could be
beautiful, and warm, and—oh please, Guy, let’s take it, all right?”

“Well sure,” Guy said, smiling. “If we can get out of the other thing.”
Rosemary grabbed his elbow happily. “We will!” she said. “You’ll think

of something, I know you will!”

Guy telephoned Mrs. Cortez from a glass-walled booth while

Rosemary, outside, tried to lip-read. Mrs. Cortez said she would give them
until three o’clock; if she hadn’t heard from them by then she would call the
next party on the waiting list.

They went to the Russian Tea Room and ordered Bloody Mary’s and

chicken salad sandwiches on black bread.

“You could tell them I’m sick and have to go into the hospital,”

Rosemary said.

But that was neither convincing nor compelling. Instead Guy spun a

story about a call to join a company of Come Blow Your Horn leaving for a
four-month USO tour of Vietnam and the Far East. The actor playing Alan
had broken his hip and unless he, Guy, who knew the part from stock,
stepped in and replaced him, the tour would have to be postponed for at
least two weeks. Which would be a damn shame, the way those kids over

there were slugging away against the Commies. His wife would have to
stay with her folks in Omaha…

He ran it twice and went to find the phone.
Rosemary sipped her drink, keeping her left hand all-fingers-crossed

under the table. She thought about the First Avenue apartment she didn’t
want and made a conscientious mental list of its good points; the shiny new
kitchen, the dishwasher, the view of the East River, the central air
conditioning…

The waitress brought the sandwiches.
A pregnant woman went by in a navy blue dress. Rosemary watched

her. She must have been in her sixth or seventh month, talking back happily
over her shoulder to an older woman with packages, probably her mother.

Someone waved from the opposite wall—the red-haired girl who had

come into CBS a few weeks before Rosemary left. Rosemary waved back.
The girl mouthed something and, when Rosemary didn’t understand,
mouthed it again. A man facing the girl turned to look at Rosemary, a
starved-looking waxen-faced man.

And there came Guy, tall and handsome, biting back his grin, with yes

glowing all over him.

“Yes?” Rosemary asked as he took his seat opposite her.
“Yes,” he said. “The lease is void; the deposit will be returned; I’m to

keep an eye open for Lieutenant Hartman of the Signal Corps. Mrs. Cortez
awaits us at two.”

“You called her?”
“I called her.”
The red-haired girl was suddenly with them, flushed and bright-eyed. “I

said ‘Marriage certainly agrees with you, you look marvelous,’” she said.

Rosemary, ransacking for the girl’s name, laughed and said, “Thank

you! We’re celebrating. We just got an apartment in the Bramford!”

“The Bram?” the girl said. “I’m mad about it! If you ever want to sub-

let, I’m first, and don’t you forget it! All those weird gargoyles and
creatures climbing up and down between the windows!”

When Rosemary had first come to New York in June of 1962 she had

joined another Omaha girl and two girls from Atlanta in an apartment on
lower Lexington Avenue. Hutch lived next door, and though he declined to
be the full-time father-substitute the girls would have made of him—he had
raised two daughters of his own and that was quite enough, thank you—he
was nonetheless on hand in emergencies, such as The Night Someone Was
on The Fire Escape and The Time Jeanne Almost Choked to Death. His
name was Edward Hutchins, he was English, he was fifty-four. Under three
different pen names he wrote three different series of boys’ adventure
books.

To Rosemary he gave another sort of emergency assistance. She was the

youngest of six children, the other five of whom had married early and
made homes close to their parents; behind her in Omaha she had left an
angry, suspicious father, a silent mother, and four resenting brothers and
sisters. (Only the next-to-the-oldest, Brian, who had a drink problem, had
said, “Go on, Rosie, do what you want to do,” and had slipped her a plastic
handbag with eighty-five dollars in it.) In New York Rosemary felt guilty
and selfish, and Hutch bucked her up with strong tea and talks about parents
and children and one’s duty to oneself. She asked him questions that had
been unspeakable in Catholic High; he sent her to a night course in

philosophy at NYU. “I’ll make a duchess out of this cockney flower girl
yet,” he said, and Rosemary had had wit enough to say “Garn!”

Now, every month or so, Rosemary and Guy had dinner with Hutch,

either in their apartment or, when it was his turn, in a restaurant. Guy found
Hutch a bit boring but always treated him cordially; his wife had been a
cousin of Terence Rattigan, the playwright, and Rattigan and Hutch
corresponded. Connections often proved crucial in the theater, Guy knew,
even connections at second hand.

On the Thursday after they saw the apartment, Rosemary and Guy had

dinner with Hutch at Klube’s, a small German restaurant on Twenty-third
Street. They had given his name to Mrs. Cortez on Tuesday afternoon as
one of three references she had asked for, and he had already received and
answered her letter of inquiry.

“I was tempted to say that you were drug addicts or litterbugs,” he said,

“or something equally repellent to managers of apartment houses.”

They asked why.
“I don’t know whether or not you know it,” he said, buttering a roll,

“but the Bramford had rather an unpleasant reputation early in the century.”
He looked up, saw that they didn’t know and went on. (He had a broad
shiny face, blue eyes that darted enthusiastically, and a few strands of
wetted-down black hair combed crossways over his scalp.) “Along with the
Isadora Duncans and Theodore Dreisers,” he said, “the Bramford has
housed a considerable number of less attractive personages. It’s where the
Trench sisters performed their little dietary experiments, and where Keith
Kennedy held his parties. Adrian Marcato lived there too; and so did Pearl
Ames.”

was Adrian Marcato?”

“The Trench sisters,” Hutch said, “were two proper Victorian ladies

who were occasional cannibals. They cooked and ate several young
children, including a niece.”

“Lovely,” Guy said.
Hutch turned to Rosemary. “Adrian Marcato practiced witchcraft,” he

said. “He made quite a splash in the eighteen-nineties by announcing that he
had succeeded in conjuring up the living Satan. He showed off a handful of
hair and some claw-parings, and apparently people believed him; enough of

them, at least, to form a mob that attacked and nearly killed him in the
Bramford lobby.”

“You’re joking,” Rosemary said.
“I’m quite serious. A few years later the Keith Kennedy business began,

and by the twenties the house was half empty.”

Guy said, “I knew about Keith Kennedy and about Pearl Ames, but I

didn’t know Adrian Marcato lived there.”

“And those sisters,” Rosemary said with a shudder.
“It was only World War Two and the housing shortage,” Hutch said,

“that filled the place up again, and now it’s acquired a bit of Grand-Old-
Apartment-House prestige; but in the twenties it was called Black Bramford
and sensible people stayed away. The melon is for the lady, isn’t it,
Rosemary?”

Guy; he pursed his brow and gave a quick headshake: It’s nothing, don’t let
him scare you.

The waiter left. “Over the years,” Hutch said, “the Bramford has had far

more than its share of ugly and unsavory happenings. Nor have all of them
been in the distant past. In 1959 a dead infant was found wrapped in
newspaper in the basement.”

Rosemary said, “But—awful things probably happen in every apartment

house now and then.”

“Now and then,” Hutch said. “The point is, though, that at the Bramford

awful things happen a good deal more frequently than ‘now and then.’
There are less spectacular irregularities too. There’ve been more suicides
there, for instance, than in houses of comparable size and age.”

“What’s the answer, Hutch?” Guy said, playing serious-and-concerned.

“There must be some kind of explanation.”

Hutch looked at him for a moment. “I don’t know,” he said. “Perhaps

it’s simply that the notoriety of a pair of Trench sisters attracts an Adrian
Marcato, and his notoriety attracts a Keith Kennedy, and eventually a house
becomes a—a kind of rallying place for people who are more prone than
others to certain types of behavior. Or perhaps there are things we don’t
know yet—about magnetic fields or electrons or whatever—ways in which
a place can quite literally be malign. I do know this, though: the Bramford
is by no means unique. There was a house in London, on Praed Street, in

which five separate brutal murders took place within sixty years. None of
the five was in any way connected with any of the others; the murderers
weren’t related nor were the victims, nor were all the murders committed
for the same moonstone or Maltese falcon. Yet five separate brutal murders
took place within sixty years. In a small house with a shop on the street and
an apartment overhead. It was demolished in 1954—for no especially
pressing purpose, since as far as I know the plot was left empty.”

Rosemary worked her spoon in melon. “Maybe there are good houses

too,” she said; “houses where people keep falling in love and getting
married and having babies.”

“And becoming stars,” Guy said.
“Probably there are,” Hutch said. “Only one never hears of them. It’s

the stinkers that get the publicity.” He smiled at Rosemary and Guy. “I wish
you two would look for a good house instead of the Bramford,” he said.

Rosemary’s spoon of melon stopped halfway to her mouth. “Are you

honestly trying to talk us out of it?” she asked.

“My dear girl,” Hutch said, “I had a perfectly good date with a

charming woman this evening and broke it solely to see you and say my
say. I am honestly trying to talk you out of it.”

“Well, Jesus, Hutch—” Guy began.
“I am not saying,” Hutch said, “that you will walk into the Bramford

and be hit on the head with a piano or eaten by spinsters or turned to stone.
I am simply saying that the record is there and ought to be considered along
with the reasonable rent and the working fireplace: the house has a high
incidence of unpleasant happenings. Why deliberately enter a danger zone?
Go to the Dakota or the Osborne if you’re dead set on nineteenth century
splendor.”

“The Dakota is co-op,” Rosemary said, “and the Osborne’s going to be

torn down.”

“Aren’t you exaggerating a little bit, Hutch?” Guy said. “Have there

been any other ‘unpleasant happenings’ in the past few years? Besides that
baby in the basement?”

“An elevator man was killed last winter,” Hutch said. “In a not-at-the-

dinner-table kind of accident. I was at the library this afternoon with the
Times Index and three hours of microfilm; would you care to hear more?”

“It’s silly,” he said. “All right, a lot of unpleasant things have happened
there. That doesn’t mean that more of them are going to happen. I don’t see
why the Bramford is any more of a ‘danger zone’ than any other house in
the city. You can flip a coin and get five heads in a row; that doesn’t mean
that the next five flips are going to be heads too, and it doesn’t mean that
the coin is any different from any other coin. It’s coincidence, that’s all.”

“If there were really something wrong,” Rosemary said, “wouldn’t it

have been demolished? Like the house in London?”

“The house in London,” Hutch said, “was owned by the family of the

last chap murdered there. The Bramford is owned by the church next door.”

“There you are,” Guy said, lighting a cigarette; “we’ve got divine

protection.”

“It hasn’t been working,” Hutch said.
The waiter lifted away their plates.
Rosemary said, “I didn’t know it was owned by a church,” and Guy

said, “The whole city is, honey.”

“Have you tried the Wyoming?” Hutch asked. “It’s in the same block, I

think.”

“Hutch,” Rosemary said, “we’ve tried everywhere. There’s nothing,

absolutely nothing, except the new houses, with neat square rooms that are
all exactly alike and television cameras in the elevators.”

“Is that so terrible?” Hutch asked, smiling.
“Yes,” Rosemary said, and Guy said, “We were set to go into one, but

we backed out to take this.”

Hutch looked at them for a moment, then sat back and struck the table

with wide-apart palms. “Enough,” he said. “I shall mind my own business,
as I ought to have done from the outset. Make fires in your working
fireplace! I’ll give you a bolt for the door and keep my mouth shut from this
day forward. I’m an idiot; forgive me.”

Rosemary smiled. “The door already has a bolt,” she said. “And one of

those chain things and a peephole.”

“Well, mind you use all three,” Hutch said. “And don’t go wandering

through the halls introducing yourself to all and sundry. You’re not in
Iowa.”

“Omaha.”

The waiter brought their main courses.

Later on Monday they received a telephone call from Martin Gardenia,

the son of the apartment’s previous tenant. They agreed to meet him at the
apartment on Tuesday evening at eight, and, doing so, found him to be a tall
man past sixty with a cheerful open manner. He pointed out the things he
wanted to sell and named his prices, all of which were attractively low.
Rosemary and Guy conferred and examined, and bought two air
conditioners, a rosewood vanity with a petit-point bench, the living room’s
Persian rug, and the andirons, firescreen, and tools. Mrs. Gardenia’s rolltop
desk, disappointingly, was not for sale. While Guy wrote a check and
helped tag the items to be left behind, Rosemary measured the living room
and the bedroom with a six-foot folding rule she had bought that morning.

The previous March, Guy had played a role on Another World, a

daytime television series. The character was back now for three days, so for
the rest of the week Guy was busy. Rosemary winnowed a folder of
decorating schemes she had collected since high school, found two that
seemed appropriate to the apartment, and with those to guide her went
looking at furnishings with Joan Jellico, one of the girls from Atlanta she
had roomed with on coming to New York. Joan had the card of a decorator,
which gave them entrance to wholesale houses and showrooms of every
sort. Rosemary looked and made shorthand notes and drew sketches to
bring to Guy, and hurried home spilling over with fabric and wallpaper
samples in time to catch him on Another World and then run out again and
shop for dinner. She skipped her sculpture class and canceled, happily, a
dental appointment.

ceilings and unfamiliar dark into which they came with a lamp and a
shopping bag, striking echoes from the farthest rooms. They turned on their
air conditioners and admired their rug and their fireplace and Rosemary’s
vanity; admired too their bathtub, doorknobs, hinges, molding, floors, stove,
refrigerator, bay windows, and view. They picnicked on the rug, on tuna
sandwiches and beer, and made floor plans of all four rooms, Guy
measuring and Rosemary drawing. On the rug again, they unplugged the
lamp and stripped and made love in the nightglow of shadeless windows.
“Shh!” Guy hissed afterwards, wide-eyed with fear. “I hear—the Trench
sisters chewing!” Rosemary hit him on the head, hard.

They bought a sofa and a king-size bed, a table for the kitchen and two

bentwood chairs. They called Con Ed and the phone company and stores
and workmen and the Padded Wagon.

The painters came on Wednesday the eighteenth; patched, spackled,

primed, painted, and were gone on Friday the twentieth, leaving colors very
much like Rosemary’s samples. A solitary paperhanger came in and
grumbled and papered the bedroom.

They called stores and workmen and Guy’s mother in Montreal. They

bought an armoire and a dining table and hi-fi components and new dishes
and silverware. They were flush. In 1964 Guy had done a series of Anacin
commercials that, shown time and time again, had earned him eighteen
thousand dollars and was still producing a sizable income.

They hung window shades and papered shelves, watched carpet go

down in the bedroom and white vinyl in the hallway. They got a plug-in
phone with three jacks; paid bills and left a forwarding notice at the post
office.

On Friday, August 27th, they moved. Joan and Dick Jellico sent a large

potted plant and Guy’s agent a small one. Hutch sent a telegram: The
Bramford will change from a bad house to a good house when one of its
doors is marked R. and G. Woodhouse.

Guy was busy too, away every day like other women’s husbands. With

Labor Day past, his vocal coach was back in town; Guy worked with him
each morning and auditioned for plays and commercials most afternoons.
At breakfast he was touchy reading the theatrical page—everyone else was
out of town with Skyscraper or Drat! The Cat! or The Impossible Years or
Hot September; only he was in New York with residuals-from-Anacin—but
Rosemary knew that very soon he’d get something good, and quietly she set
his coffee before him and quietly took for herself the newspaper’s other
section.

The nursery was, for the time being, a den, with off-white walls and the

furniture from the old apartment. The white-and-yellow wallpaper would
come later, clean and fresh. Rosemary had a sample of it lying ready in
Picasso’s Picassos, along with a Saks ad showing the crib and bureau.

She wrote to her brother Brian to share her happiness. No one else in

the family would have welcomed it; they were all hostile now—parents,

brothers, sisters—not forgiving her for A) marrying a Protestant, B)
marrying in only a civil ceremony, and C) having a mother-in-law who had
had two divorces and was married now to a Jew up in Canada.

She made Guy chicken Marengo and vitello tonnato, baked a mocha

layer cake and a jarful of butter cookies.

“I didn’t know they were still making Ma and Pa Kettle movies,” Guy

said, and Rosemary laughed uncertainly. She was nine years younger than
Guy, and some of his references lacked clear meaning for her.

They met the Goulds in 7F, a pleasant elderly couple, and the German-

accented Bruhns and their son Walter in 7C. They smiled and nodded in the
hall to the Kelloggs, 7G, Mr. Stein, 7H, and the Messrs. Dubin and DeVore,
7B. (Rosemary learned everyone’s name immediately, from doorbells and
from face-up mail on doormats, which she had no qualms about reading.)
The Kapps in 7D, unseen and with no mail, were apparently still away for
the summer; and the Castevets in 7A, heard (“Roman! Where’s Terry?”) but
unseen, were either recluses or comers-and-goers-at-odd-hours. Their door
was opposite the elevator, their doormat supremely readable. They got air
mail letters from a surprising variety of places: Hawick, Scotland; Langeac,
France; Vitória, Brazil; Cessnock, Australia. They subscribed to both Life
and Look.

No sign at all did Rosemary and Guy see of the Trench sisters, Adrian

Marcato, Keith Kennedy, Pearl Ames, or their latter-day equivalents. Dubin
and DeVore were homosexuals; everyone else seemed entirely
commonplace.

Almost every night the midwestern bray could be heard, from the

apartment which, Rosemary and Guy came to realize, had originally been
the bigger front part of their own. “But it’s impossible to be a hundred per
cent sure!” the woman argued, and, “If you want my opinion, we shouldn’t
tell her at all; that’s my opinion!”

talking and singing. Guy fell asleep easily but Rosemary lay awake until
after two, hearing flat unmusical singing and a flute or clarinet that piped
along beside it.

It was here, Rosemary would remember, that a dead baby wrapped in

newspaper had not so long ago been found. Whose baby had it been, and
how had it died? Who had found it? Had the person who left it been caught
and punished? She thought of going to the library and reading the story in
old newspapers as Hutch had done; but that would have made it more real,
more dreadful than it already was. To know the spot where the baby had
lain, to have perhaps to walk past it on the way to the laundry room and
again on the way back to the elevator, would have been unbearable. Partial
ignorance, she decided, was partial bliss. Damn Hutch and his good
intentions!

The laundry room would have done nicely in a prison: steamy brick

walls, more bulbs in cages, and scores of deep double sinks in iron-mesh
cubicles. There were coin-operated washers and dryers and, in most of the
padlocked cubicles, privately owned machines. Rosemary came down on
weekends or after five; earlier on weekdays a bevy of Negro laundresses
ironed and gossiped and had abruptly fallen silent at her one unknowing
intrusion. She had smiled all around and tried to be invisible, but they
hadn’t spoken another word and she had felt self-conscious, clumsy, and
Negro-oppressing.

One afternoon, when she and Guy had been in the Bramford a little over

two weeks, Rosemary was sitting in the laundry room at 5:15 reading The
New Yorker and waiting to add softener to the rinse water when a girl her

own age came in—a dark-haired cameo-faced girl who, Rosemary realized
with a start, was Anna Maria Alberghetti. She was wearing white sandals,
black shorts, and an apricot silk blouse, and was carrying a yellow plastic
laundry basket. Nodding at Rosemary and then not looking at her, she went
to one of the washers, opened it, and began feeding dirty clothes into it.

Anna Maria Alberghetti, as far as Rosemary knew, did not live at the

Bramford, but she could well have been visiting someone and helping out
with the chores. A closer look, though, told Rosemary that she was
mistaken; this girl’s nose was too long and sharp and there were other less
definable differences of expression and carriage. The resemblance,
however, was a remarkable one—and suddenly Rosemary found the girl
looking at her with an embarrassed questioning smile, the washer beside her
closed and filling.

“I’m sorry,” Rosemary said. “I thought you were Anna Maria

Alberghetti, so I’ve been staring at you. I’m sorry.”

side. “That happens a lot,” she said. “You don’t have to apologize. People
have been thinking I’m Anna Maria since I was, oh, just a kid, when she
first started out in Here Comes The Groom.” She looked at Rosemary, still
blushing but no longer smiling. “I don’t see a resemblance at all,” she said.
“I’m of Italian parentage like she is, but no physical resemblance.”

“There’s a very strong one,” Rosemary said.
“I guess there is,” the girl said; “everyone’s always telling me. I don’t

see it though. I wish I did, believe me.”

“Do you know her?” Rosemary asked.
“No.”
“The way you said ‘Anna Maria’ I thought—”
“Oh no, I just call her that. I guess from talking about her so much with

everyone.” She wiped her hand on her shorts and stepped forward, holding
it out and smiling. “I’m Terry Gionoffrio,” she said, “and I can’t spell it so
don’t you try.”

Rosemary smiled and shook hands. “I’m Rosemary Woodhouse,” she

said. “We’re new tenants here. Have you been here long?”

“I’m not a tenant at all,” the girl said. “I’m just staying with Mr. and

Mrs. Castevet, up on the seventh floor. I’m their guest, sort of, since June.
Oh, you know them?”

and used to be the back part of it.”

“Oh for goodness’ sake,” the girl said, “you’re the party that took the

old lady’s apartment! Mrs.—the old lady who died!”

“Gardenia.”
“That’s right. She was a good friend of the Castevets. She used to grow

herbs and things and bring them in for Mrs. Castevet to cook with.”

Rosemary nodded. “When we first looked at the apartment,” she said,

“one room was full of plants.”

greenhouse in the kitchen and grows things herself.”

“Excuse me, I have to put softener in,” Rosemary said. She got up and

got the bottle from the laundry bag on the washer.

“Do you know who you look like?” Terry asked her; and Rosemary,

unscrewing the cap, said, “No, who?”

“Piper Laurie.”
Rosemary laughed. “Oh, no,” she said. “It’s funny your saying that,

because my husband used to date Piper Laurie before she got married.”

“No kidding? In Hollywood?”
“No, here.” Rosemary poured a capful of the softener. Terry opened the

washer door and Rosemary thanked her and tossed the softener in.

“Is he an actor, your husband?” Terry asked.
Rosemary nodded complacently, capping the bottle.
“No kidding! What’s his name?”
“Guy Woodhouse,” Rosemary said. “He was in Luther and Nobody

Loves An Albatross, and he does a lot of work in television.”

“Gee, I watch TV all day long,” Terry said. “I’ll bet I’ve seen him!”

Glass crashed somewhere in the basement; a bottle smashing or a
windowpane. “Yow,” Terry said.

Rosemary hunched her shoulders and looked uneasily toward the

laundry room’s doorway. “I hate this basement,” she said.

“Me too,” Terry said. “I’m glad you’re here. If I was alone now I’d be

scared stiff.”

“A delivery boy probably dropped a bottle,” Rosemary said.
Terry said, “Listen, we could come down together regular. Your door is

down together. We could call each other first on the house phone.”

“That would be great,” Rosemary said. “I hate coming down here

alone.”

Terry laughed happily, seemed to seek words, and then, still laughing,

said, “I’ve got a good luck charm that’ll maybe do for both of us!” She
pulled away the collar of her blouse, drew out a silver neckchain, and
showed Rosemary on the end of it a silver filigree ball a little less than an
inch in diameter.

“Oh, that’s beautiful,” Rosemary said.
“Isn’t it?” Terry said. “Mrs. Castevet gave it to me the day before

yesterday. It’s three hundred years old. She grew the stuff inside it in that
little greenhouse. It’s good luck, or anyway it’s supposed to be.”

Rosemary looked more closely at the charm Terry held out between

thumb and fingertip. It was filled with a greenish-brown spongy substance
that pressed out against the silver openwork. A bitter smell made Rosemary
draw back.

Terry laughed again. “I’m not mad about the smell either,” she said. “I

hope it works!”

“It’s a beautiful charm,” Rosemary said. “I’ve never seen anything like

it.”

“It’s European,” Terry said. She leaned a hip against a washer and

admired the ball, turning it one way and another. “The Castevets are the
most wonderful people in the world, bar none,” she said. “They picked me
up off the sidewalk—and I mean that literally; I conked out on Eighth
Avenue—and they brought me here and adopted me like a mother and
father. Or like a grandmother and grandfather, I guess.”

“You were sick?” Rosemary asked.
“That’s putting it mildly,” Terry said. “I was starving and on dope and

doing a lot of other things that I’m so ashamed of I could throw up just
thinking about them. And Mr. and Mrs. Castevet completely rehabilitated
me. They got me off the H, the dope, and got food into me and clean clothes
on me, and now nothing is too good for me as far as they’re concerned.
They give me all kinds of health food and vitamins, they even have a doctor
come give me regular check-ups! It’s because they’re childless. I’m like the
daughter they never had, you know?”

Rosemary nodded.

Terry said. “Maybe some kind of sex thing they would want me to do, or he
would want, or she. But they’ve really been like real grandparents. Nothing
like that. They’re going to put me through secretarial school in a little while
and later on I’m going to pay them back. I only had three years of high
school but there’s a way of making it up.” She dropped the filigree ball back
into her blouse.

Rosemary said, “It’s nice to know there are people like that, when you

hear so much about apathy and people who are afraid of getting involved.”

dead now if it wasn’t for them. That’s an absolute fact. Dead or in jail.”

“You don’t have any family that could have helped you?”
“A brother in the Navy. The less said about him the better.”
Rosemary transferred her finished wash to a dryer and waited with

Terry for hers to be done. They spoke of Guy’s occasional role on Another
World (“Sure I remember! You’re married to him?”), the Bramford’s past
(of which Terry knew nothing), and the coming visit to New York of Pope
Paul. Terry was, like Rosemary, Catholic but no longer observing; she was
anxious, though, to get a ticket to the papal mass to be celebrated at Yankee
Stadium. When her wash was done and drying the two girls walked together
to the service elevator and rode to the seventh floor. Rosemary invited Terry
in to see the apartment, but Terry asked if she could take a rain check; the
Castevets ate at six and she didn’t like to be late. She said she would call
Rosemary on the house phone later in the evening so they could go down
together to pick up their dry laundry.

Rosemary told him about Terry and the Castevets, and that Terry had

remembered him from Another World. He made light of it, but it pleased
him. He was depressed by the likelihood that an actor named Donald
Baumgart was going to beat him out for a part in a new comedy for which
both had read a second time that afternoon. “Jesus Christ,” he said, “what

kind of a name is Donald Baumgart?” His own name, before he changed it,
had been Sherman Peden.

Rosemary and Terry picked up their laundry at eight o’clock, and Terry

came in with Rosemary to meet Guy and see the apartment. She blushed
and was flustered by Guy, which spurred him to flowery compliments and
the bringing of ashtrays and the striking of matches. Terry had never seen
the apartment before; Mrs. Gardenia and the Castevets had had a falling-out
shortly after her arrival, and soon afterwards Mrs. Gardenia had gone into
the coma from which she had never emerged. “It’s a lovely apartment,”
Terry said.

“It will be,” Rosemary said. “We’re not even halfway furnished yet.”
“I’ve got it!” Guy cried with a handclap. He pointed triumphantly at

Terry. “Anna Maria Alberghetti!”

Rosemary told him, in happy detail. “And the neighbors certainly don’t

seem abnormal,” she said. “Except normal abnormal like homosexuals;
there are two of them, and across the hall from us there’s a nice old couple
named Gould with a place in Pennsylvania where they breed Persian cats.
We can have one any time we want.”

“They shed,” Hutch said.
“And there’s another couple that we haven’t actually met yet who took

in this girl who was hooked on drugs, whom we have met, and they
completely cured her and are putting her through secretarial school.”

“It sounds as if you’ve moved into Sunnybrook Farm,” Hutch said; “I’m

delighted.”

“The basement is kind of creepy,” Rosemary said. “I curse you every

time I go down there.”

“Why on earth me?”
“Your stories.”
“If you mean the ones I write, I curse me too; if you mean the ones I

told you, you might with equal justification curse the fire alarm for the fire

and the weather bureau for the typhoon.”

Rosemary, cowed, said, “It won’t be so bad from now on. That girl I

mentioned is going down there with me.”

Hutch said, “It’s obvious you’ve exerted the healthy influence I

predicted and the house is no longer a chamber of horrors. Have fun with
the ice bucket and say hello to Guy.”

“My name is Rosemary,” Rosemary said. “I ate my egg but I’ve never

even heard of Captain Crunch. Who is he?”

The night was mild and balmy and they walked; and as they approached

the Bramford’s blackened mass they saw on the sidewalk before it a group
of twenty or so people gathered in a semicircle at the side of a parked car.
Two police cars waited double-parked, their roof lights spinning red.

Rosemary and Guy walked faster, hand in hand, their senses sharpening.

Cars on the avenue slowed questioningly; windows scraped open in the
Bramford and heads looked out beside gargoyles’ heads. The night
doorman Toby came from the house with a tan blanket that a policeman
turned to take from him.

The roof of the car, a Volkswagen, was crumpled to the side; the

windshield was crazed with a million fractures. “Dead,” someone said, and

someone else said, “I look up and I think it’s some kind of a big bird
zooming down, like an eagle or something.”

Rosemary and Guy stood on tiptoes, craned over people’s shoulders.

“Get back now, will you?” a policeman at the center said. The shoulders
separated, a sport-shirted back moved away. On the sidewalk Terry lay,
watching the sky with one eye, half of her face gone to red pulp. Tan
blanket flipped over her. Settling, it reddened in one place and then another.

Rosemary wheeled, eyes shut, right hand making an automatic cross.

She kept her mouth tightly closed, afraid she might vomit.

Guy winced and drew air in under his teeth. “Oh, Jesus,” he said, and

groaned. “Oh my God.”

A policeman said, “Get back, will you?”
“We know her,” Guy said.
Another policeman turned and said, “What’s her name?”
“Terry.”
“Terry what?” He was forty or so and sweating. His eyes were blue and

beautiful, with thick black lashes.

Guy said, “Ro? What was her name? Terry what?”
Rosemary opened her eyes and swallowed. “I don’t remember,” she

said. “Italian, with a G. A long name. She made a joke about spelling it. Not
being able to.”

Guy said to the blue-eyed policeman, “She was staying with people

named Castevet, in apartment seven A.”

“We’ve got that already,” the policeman said.
Another policeman came up, holding a sheet of pale yellow notepaper.

Mr. Micklas was behind him, tight-mouthed, in a raincoat over striped
pajamas. “Short and sweet,” the policeman said to the blue-eyed one, and
handed him the yellow paper. “She stuck it to the window sill with a Band-
Aid so it wouldn’t blow away.”

“Anybody there?”
The other shook his head.
The blue-eyed policeman read what was written on the sheet of paper,

sucking thoughtfully at his front teeth. “Theresa Gionoffrio,” he said. He
pronounced it as an Italian would. Rosemary nodded.

Guy said, “Wednesday night you wouldn’t have guessed she had a sad

thought in her mind.”

He laid the paper inside it and closed the holder with a width of yellow
sticking out.

“Did you know her?” Mr. Micklas asked Rosemary.
“Only slightly,” she said.
“Oh, of course,” Mr. Micklas said; “you’re on seven too.”
Guy said to Rosemary, “Come on, honey, let’s go upstairs.”
The policeman said, “Do you have any idea where we can find these

people Castevet?”

“No, none at all,” Guy said. “We’ve never even met them.”
“They’re usually at home now,” Rosemary said. “We hear them through

the wall. Our bedroom is next to theirs.”

Guy put his hand on Rosemary’s back. “Come on, hon,” he said. They

nodded to the policeman and Mr. Micklas, and started toward the house.

“Here they come now,” Mr. Micklas said. Rosemary and Guy stopped

and turned. Coming from downtown, as they themselves had come, were a
tall, broad, white-haired woman and a tall, thin, shuffling man. “The
Castevets?” Rosemary asked. Mr. Micklas nodded.

Mrs. Castevet was wrapped in light blue, with snow-white dabs of

gloves, purse, shoes, and hat. Nurselike she supported her husband’s
forearm. He was dazzling, in an every-color seersucker jacket, red slacks, a
pink bow tie, and a gray fedora with a pink band. He was seventy-five or
older; she was sixty-eight or-nine. They came closer with expressions of
young alertness, with friendly quizzical smiles. The policeman stepped
forward to meet them and their smiles faltered and fell away. Mrs. Castevet
said something worryingly; Mr. Castevet frowned and shook his head. His
wide, thin-lipped mouth was rosy-pink, as if lipsticked; his cheeks were
chalky, his eyes small and bright in deep sockets. She was big-nosed, with a
sullen fleshy underlip. She wore pinkrimmed eyeglasses on a neckchain that
dipped down from behind plain pearl earrings.

The policeman said, “Are you folks the Castevets on the seventh floor?”
“We are,” Mr. Castevet said in a dry voice that had to be listened for.
“You have a young woman named Theresa Gionoffrio living with you?”
“We do,” Mr. Castevet said. “What’s wrong? Has there been an

accident?”

He waited, looking at each of them in turn, and then he said, “She’s dead.
She killed herself.” He raised a hand, the thumb pointing back over his
shoulder. “She jumped out of the window.”

They looked at him with no change of expression at all, as if he hadn’t

spoken yet; then Mrs. Castevet leaned sideways, glanced beyond him at the
red-stained blanket, and stood straight again and looked him in the eyes.
“That’s not possible,” she said in her loud midwestern Roman-bring-me-
some-root-beer voice. “It’s a mistake. Somebody else is under there.”

The policeman, not turning from her, said, “Artie, would you let these

people take a look, please?”

Mrs. Castevet marched past him, her jaw set.
Mr. Castevet stayed where he was. “I knew this would happen,” he said.

“She got deeply depressed every three weeks or so. I noticed it and told my
wife, but she pooh-poohed me. She’s an optimist who refuses to admit that
everything doesn’t always turn out the way she wants it to.”

Mrs. Castevet came back. “That doesn’t mean that she killed herself,”

she said. “She was a very happy girl with no reason for self-destruction. It
must have been an accident. She must have been cleaning the windows and
lost her hold. She was always surprising us by cleaning things and doing
things for us.”

“She wasn’t cleaning windows at midnight,” Mr. Castevet said.
“Why not?” Mrs. Castevet said angrily. “Maybe she was!”
The policeman held out the pale yellow paper, having taken it from his

pad holder.

Mrs. Castevet hesitated, then took it and turned it around and read it.

Mr. Castevet tipped his head in over her arm and read it too, his thin vivid
lips moving.

“Is that her handwriting?” the policeman asked.
Mrs. Castevet nodded. Mr. Castevet said, “Definitely. Absolutely.”
The policeman held out his hand and Mrs. Castevet gave him the paper.

He said, “Thank you. I’ll see you get it back when we’re done with it.”

She took off her glasses, dropped them on their neckchain, and covered

both her eyes with white-gloved fingertips. “I don’t believe it,” she said. “I
just don’t believe it. She was so happy. All her troubles were in the past.”

Mr. Castevet put his hand on her shoulder and looked at the ground and
shook his head.

“Do you know the name of her next-of-kin?” the policeman asked.
“She didn’t have any,” Mrs. Castevet said. “She was all alone. She

didn’t have anyone, only us.”

“Didn’t she have a brother?” Rosemary asked.
Mrs. Castevet put on her glasses and looked at her. Mr. Castevet looked

up from the ground, his deep-socketed eyes glinting under his hat brim.

“Did she?” the policeman asked.
“She said she did,” Rosemary said. “In the Navy.”
The policeman looked to the Castevets.
“It’s news to me,” Mrs. Castevet said, and Mr. Castevet said, “To both

of us.”

The policeman asked Rosemary, “Do you know his rank or where he’s

stationed?”

“No, I don’t,” she said, and to the Castevets: “She mentioned him to me

the other day, in the laundry room. I’m Rosemary Woodhouse.”

Guy said, “We’re in seven E.”
“I feel just the way you do, Mrs. Castevet,” Rosemary said. “She

seemed so happy and full of—of good feelings about the future. She said
wonderful things about you and your husband; how grateful she was to both
of you for all the help you were giving her.”

“Thank you,” Mrs. Castevet said, and Mr. Castevet said, “It’s nice of

you to tell us that. It makes it a little easier.”

The policeman said, “You don’t know anything else about this brother

except that he’s in the Navy?”

“That’s all,” Rosemary said. “I don’t think she liked him very much.”
“It should be easy to find him,” Mr. Castevet said, “with an uncommon

name like Gionoffrio.”

Guy put his hand on Rosemary’s back again and they withdrew toward

the house. “I’m so stunned and so sorry,” Rosemary said to the Castevets;
and Guy said, “It’s such a pity. It’s—”

Mrs. Castevet said, “Thank you,” and Mr. Castevet said something long

and sibilant of which only the phrase “her last days” was understandable.

 
They rode upstairs (“Oh, my!” the night elevator man Diego said; “Oh, my!
Oh, my!”), looked ruefully at the now-haunted door of 7A, and walked
through the branching hallway to their own apartment. Mr. Kellogg in 7G
peered out from behind his chained door and asked what was going on
downstairs. They told him.

They sat on the edge of their bed for a few minutes, speculating about

Terry’s reason for killing herself. Only if the Castevets told them some day
what was in the note, they agreed, would they ever learn for certain what
had driven her to the violent death they had nearly witnessed. And even
knowing what was in the note, Guy pointed out, they might still not know
the full answer, for part of it had probably been beyond Terry’s own
understanding. Something had led her to drugs and something had led her to
death; what that something was, it was too late now for anyone to know.

“Remember what Hutch said?” Rosemary asked. “About there being

more suicides here than in other buildings?”

“Ah, Ro,” Guy said, “that’s crap, honey, that ‘danger zone’ business.”
“Hutch believes it.”
“Well, it’s still crap.”
“I can imagine what he’s going to say when he hears about this.”
“Don’t tell him,” Guy said. “He sure as hell won’t read about it in the

papers.” A strike against the New York newspapers had begun that
morning, and there were rumors that it might continue a month or longer.

They undressed, showered, resumed a stopped game of Scrabble,

stopped it, made love, and found milk and a dish of cold spaghetti in the
refrigerator. Just before they put the lights out at two-thirty, Guy
remembered to check the answering service and found that he had got a part
in a radio commercial for Cresta Blanca wines.

Soon he was asleep, but Rosemary lay awake beside him, seeing Terry’s

pulped face and her one eye watching the sky. After a while, though, she
was at Our Lady. Sister Agnes was shaking her fist at her, ousting her from
leadership of the second-floor monitors. “Sometimes I wonder how come
you’re the leader of anything!” she said. A bump on the other side of the
wall woke Rosemary, and Mrs. Castevet said, “And please don’t tell me
what Laura-Louise said because I’m not interested!” Rosemary turned over
and burrowed into her pillow.

nostrils were bubbling the way they always did at such moments. Thanks to
Rosemary it had been necessary to brick up all the windows, and now Our
Lady had been taken out of the beautiful-school competition being run by
the World-Herald. “If you’d listened to me, we wouldn’t have had to do it!”
Sister Agnes cried in a hoarse midwestern bray. “We’d have been all set to
go now instead of starting all over from scratch!” Uncle Mike tried to hush
her. He was the principal of Our Lady, which was connected by
passageways to his body shop in South Omaha. “I told you not to tell her
anything in advance,” Sister Agnes continued lower, piggy-eyes glinting
hatefully at Rosemary. “I told you she wouldn’t be open-minded. Time
enough later to let her in on it.” (Rosemary had told Sister Veronica about
the windows being bricked up and Sister Veronica had withdrawn the
school from the competition; otherwise no one would have noticed and they
would have won. It had been right to tell, though, Sister Agnes
notwithstanding. A Catholic school shouldn’t win by trickery.) “Anybody!
Anybody!” Sister Agnes said. “All she has to be is young, healthy, and not a
virgin. She doesn’t have to be a no-good drug-addict whore out of the
gutter. Didn’t I say that in the beginning? Anybody. As long as she’s young
and healthy and not a virgin.” Which didn’t make sense at all, not even to
Uncle Mike; so Rosemary turned over and it was Saturday afternoon, and
she and Brian and Eddie and Jean were at the candy counter in the
Orpheum, going in to see Gary Cooper and Patricia Neal in The
Fountainhead, only it was live, not a movie.

Rosemary opened the door and said, “Hello. How are you?”
Mrs. Castevet smiled bleakly. “Fine,” she said. “May I come in for a

minute?”

“Yes, of course; please do.” Rosemary stood back against the wall and

held the door wide open. A faint bitter smell brushed across her as Mrs.
Castevet came in, the smell of Terry’s silver good luck charm filled with
spongy greenish-brown. Mrs. Castevet was wearing toreador pants and
shouldn’t have been; her hips and thighs were massive, slabbed with wide
hands of fat. The pants were lime green under a blue blouse; the blade of a
screwdriver poked from her hip pocket. Stopping between the doorways of
the den and kitchen, she turned and put on her neckchained glasses and
smiled at Rosemary. A dream Rosemary had had a night or two earlier
sparked in her mind—something about Sister Agnes bawling her out for
bricking up windows—and she shook it away and smiled attentively, ready
to hear what Mrs. Castevet was about to say.

“I just came over to thank you,” Mrs. Castevet said, “for saying those

nice things to us the other night, poor Terry telling you she was grateful to
us for what we done. You’ll never know how comforting it was to hear

something like that in such a shock moment, because in both of our minds
was the thought that maybe we had failed her in some way and drove her to
it, although her note made it crystal clear, of course, that she did it of her
own free will; but anyway it was a blessing to hear the words spoken out
loud like that by somebody Terry had confided in just before the end.”

“Please, there’s no reason to thank me,” Rosemary said. “All I did was

tell you what she said to me.”

“A lot of people wouldn’t have bothered,” Mrs. Castevet said. “They’d

have just walked away without wanting to spend the air and the little bit of
musclepower. When you’re older you’ll come to realize that acts of
kindness are few and far between in this world of ours. So I do thank you,
and Roman does too. Roman is my hubby.”

Rosemary ducked her head in concession, smiled, and said, “You’re

welcome. I’m glad that I helped.”

“She was cremated yesterday morning with no ceremony,” Mrs.

Castevet said. “That’s the way she wanted it. Now we have to forget and go
on. It certainly won’t be easy; we took a lot of pleasure in having her
around, not having children of our own. Do you have any?”

“No, we don’t,” Rosemary said.
Mrs. Castevet looked into the kitchen. “Oh, that’s nice,” she said, “the

pans hanging on the wall that way. And look how you put the table, isn’t
that interesting.”

“It was in a magazine,” Rosemary said.
“You certainly got a nice paint job,” Mrs. Castevet said, fingering the

door jamb appraisingly. “Did the house do it? You must have been mighty
openhanded with the painters; they didn’t do this kind of work for us.”

“All we gave them was five dollars each,” Rosemary said.
“Oh, is that all?” Mrs. Castevet turned around and looked into the den.

“Oh, that’s nice,” she said, “a TV room.”

“It’s only temporary,” Rosemary said. “At least I hope it is. It’s going to

be a nursery.”

“Are you pregnant?” Mrs. Castevet asked, looking at her.
“Not yet,” Rosemary said, “but I hope to be, as soon as we’re settled.”
“That’s wonderful,” Mrs. Castevet said. “You’re young and healthy; you

ought to have lots of children.”

of the apartment?”

“I’d love to,” Mrs. Castevet said. “I’m dying to see what you’ve done to

it. I used to be in here almost every day. The woman who had it before you
was a dear friend of mine.”

“I know,” Rosemary said, easing past Mrs. Castevet to lead the way;

“Terry told me.”

“Oh, did she,” Mrs. Castevet said, following along. “It sounds like you

two had some long talks together down there in the laundry room.”

“Only one,” Rosemary said.
The living room startled Mrs. Castevet. “My goodness!” she said. “I

can’t get over the change! It looks so much brighter! Oh and look at that
chair. Isn’t that handsome?”

“It just came Friday,” Rosemary said.
“What did you pay for a chair like that?”
Rosemary, disconcerted, said, “I’m not sure. I think it was about two

hundred dollars.”

“You don’t mind my asking, do you?” Mrs. Castevet said, and tapped

her nose. “That’s how I got a big nose, by being nosy.”

Rosemary laughed and said, “No, no, it’s all right. I don’t mind.”
Mrs. Castevet inspected the living room, the bedroom, and the

bathroom, asking how much Mrs. Gardenia’s son had charged them for the
rug and the vanity, where they had got the night-table lamps, exactly how
old Rosemary was, and if an electric toothbrush was really any better than
the old kind. Rosemary found herself enjoying this open forthright old
woman with her loud voice and her blunt questions. She offered coffee and
cake to her.

“What does your hubby do?” Mrs. Castevet asked, sitting at the kitchen

table idly checking prices on cans of soup and oysters. Rosemary, folding a
Chemex paper, told her. “I knew it! Mrs. Castevet said. “I said to Roman
yesterday, “He’s so good-looking I’ll bet he’s a movie actor’! There’s three-
four of them in the building, you know. What movies was he in?”

“No movies,” Rosemary said. “He was in two plays called Luther and

Nobody Loves An Albatross and he does a lot of work in television and
radio.”

let Rosemary disturb the living room on her account. “Listen, Rosemary,”
she said, swallowing cake and coffee at once, “I’ve got a two-inch-thick
sirloin steak sitting defrosting right this minute, and half of it’s going to go
to waste with just Roman and me there to eat it. Why don’t you and Guy
come over and have supper with us tonight, what do you say?”

“Oh, no, we couldn’t,” Rosemary said.
“Sure you could; why not?”
“No, really, I’m sure you don’t want to—”
“It would be a big help to us if you would,” Mrs. Castevet said. She

looked into her lap, then looked up at Rosemary with a hard-to-carry smile.
“We had friends with us last night and Saturday,” she said, “but this’ll be
the first night we’ll be alone since—the other night.”

Rosemary leaned forward feelingly. “If you’re sure it won’t be trouble

for you,” she said.

“Honey, if it was trouble I wouldn’t ask you,” Mrs. Castevet said.

“Believe me, I’m as selfish as the day is long.”

Rosemary smiled. “That isn’t what Terry told me,” she said.
“Well,” Mrs. Castevet said with a pleased smile, “Terry didn’t know

what she was talking about.”

“I’ll have to check with Guy,” Rosemary said, “but you go ahead and

count on us.”

Mrs. Castevet said happily, “Listen! You tell him I won’t take no for an

answer! I want to be able to tell folks I knew him when!”

They ate their cake and coffee, talking of the excitements and hazards of

an acting career, the new season’s television shows and how bad they were,
and the continuing newspaper strike.

“Will six-thirty be too early for you?” Mrs. Castevet asked at the door.
“It’ll be perfect,” Rosemary said.
“Roman don’t like to eat any later than that,” Mrs. Castevet said. “He

has stomach trouble and if he eats too late he can’t get to sleep. You know
where we are, don’t you? Seven A, at six-thirty. We’ll be looking forward.
Oh, here’s your mail, dear; I’ll get it. Ads. Well, it’s better than getting
nothing, isn’t it?”

 
Guy came home at two-thirty in a bad mood; he had learned from his agent
that, as he had feared, the grotesquely named Donald Baumgart had won
the part he had come within a hair of getting. Rosemary kissed him and
installed him in his new easy chair with a melted cheese sandwich and a
glass of beer. She had read the script of the play and not liked it; it would
probably close out of town, she told Guy, and Donald Baumgart would
never be heard of again.

“Even if it folds,” Guy said, “it’s the kind of part that gets noticed.

You’ll see; he’ll get something else right after.” He opened the corner of his
sandwich, looked in bitterly, closed it, and started eating.

“Mrs. Castevet was here this morning,” Rosemary said. “To thank me

for telling them that Terry was grateful to them. I think she really just
wanted to see the apartment. She’s absolutely the nosiest person I’ve ever
seen. She actually asked the prices of things.”

“No kidding,” Guy said.
“She comes right out and admits she’s nosy, though, so it’s kind of

funny and forgivable instead of annoying. She even looked into the
medicine chest.”

“Just like that?”
“Just like that. And guess what she was wearing.”
“A Pillsbury sack with three X’s on it.”
“No, toreador pants.”
“Toreador pants?”
“Lime-green ones.”
“Ye gods.”
Kneeling on the floor between the bay windows, Rosemary drew a line

on brown paper with crayon and a yardstick and then measured the depth of
the window seats. “She invited us to have dinner with them this evening,”
she said, and looked at Guy. “I told her I’d have to check with you, but that
it would probably be okay.”

“Ah, Jesus, Ro,” Guy said, “we don’t want to do that, do we?”
“I think they’re lonely,” Rosemary said. “Because of Terry.”
“Honey,” Guy said, “if we get friendly with an old couple like that

we’re never going to get them off our necks. They’re right here on the same

floor with us, they’ll be looking in six times a day. Especially if she’s nosy
to begin with.”

“I told her she could count on us,” Rosemary said.
“I thought you told her you had to check first.”
“I did, but I told her she could count on us too.” Rosemary looked

helplessly at Guy. “She was so anxious for us to come.”

“Well it’s not my night for being kind to Ma and Pa Kettle,” Guy said.

“I’m sorry, honey, call her up and tell her we can’t make it.”

“All right, I will,” Rosemary said, and drew another line with the

crayon and the yardstick.

Guy finished his sandwich. “You don’t have to sulk about it,” he said.
“I’m not sulking,” Rosemary said. “I see exactly what you mean about

them being on the same floor. It’s a valid point and you’re absolutely right.
I’m not sulking at all.”

“Oh hell,” Guy said, “we’ll go.”
“No, no, what for? We don’t have to. I shopped for dinner before she

came, so that’s no problem.”

“We’ll go,” Guy said.
“We don’t have to if you don’t want to. That sounds so phony but I

really mean it, really I do.”

“We’ll go. It’ll be my good deed for the day.”
“All right, but only if you want to. And we’ll make it very clear to them

that it’s only this one time and not the beginning of anything. Right?”

“Right.”

The Castevets’ door opened and Mrs. Castevet was there, powdered and

rouged and smiling broadly in light green silk and a frilled pink apron.
“Perfect timing!” she said. “Come on in! Roman’s making Vodka Blushes
in the blender. My, I’m glad you could come, Guy! I’m fixing to tell people
I knew you when! ‘Had dinner right off that plate, he did—Guy Woodhouse
in person!’ I’m not going to wash it when you’re done; I’m going to leave it
just as is!”

Guy and Rosemary laughed and exchanged glances; Your friend, his

said, and hers said, What can I do?

There was a large foyer in which a rectangular table was set for four,

with an embroidered white cloth, plates that didn’t all match, and bright
ranks of ornate silver. To the left the foyer opened on a living room easily
twice the size of Rosemary and Guy’s but otherwise much like it. It had one
large bay window instead of two smaller ones, and a huge pink marble

mantel sculptured with lavish scrollwork. The room was oddly furnished; at
the fireplace end there were a settee and a lamp table and a few chairs, and
at the opposite end an officelike clutter of file cabinets, bridge tables piled
with newspapers, overfilled bookshelves, and a typewriter on a metal stand.
Between the two ends of the room was a twenty-foot field of brown wall-to-
wall carpet, deep and new-looking, marked with the trail of a vacuum
cleaner. In the center of it, entirely alone, a small round table stood holding
Life and Look and Scientific American.

Mrs. Castevet showed them across the brown carpet and seated them on

the settee; and as they sat Mr. Castevet came in, holding in both hands a
small tray on which four cocktail glasses ran over with clear pink liquid.
Staring at the rims of the glasses he shuffled forward across the carpet,
looking as if with every next step he would trip and fall disastrously. “I
seem to have overfilled the glasses,” he said. “No, no, don’t get up. Please.
Generally I pour these out as precisely as a bartender, don’t I, Minnie?”

Mrs. Castevet said, “Just watch the carpet.”
“But this evening,” Mr. Castevet continued, coming closer, “I made a

little too much, and rather than leave the surplus in the blender, I’m afraid I
thought I…There we are. Please, sit down. Mrs. Woodhouse?”

Rosemary took a glass, thanked him, and sat. Mrs. Castevet quickly put

a paper cocktail napkin in her lap.

“Mr. Woodhouse? A Vodka Blush. Have you ever tasted one?”
“No,” Guy said, taking one and sitting.
“Minnie,” Mr. Castevet said.
“It looks delicious,” Rosemary said, smiling vividly as she wiped the

base of her glass.

“They’re very popular in Australia,” Mr. Castevet said. He took the

final glass and raised it to Rosemary and Guy. “To our guests,” he said.
“Welcome to our home.” He drank and cocked his head critically, one eye
partway closed, the tray at his side dripping on the carpet.

Mrs. Castevet coughed in mid-swallow. “The carpet!” she choked,

pointing.

Mr. Castevet looked down. “Oh dear,” he said, and held the tray up

uncertainly.

Mrs. Castevet thrust aside her drink, hurried to her knees, and laid a

paper napkin carefully over the wetness. “Brand-new carpet,” she said.

“Brand-new carpet. This man is so clumsy!”

The Vodka Blushes were tart and quite good.
“Do you come from Australia?” Rosemary asked, when the carpet had

been blotted, the tray safely kitchened, and the Castevets seated in straight-
backed chairs.

“Oh no,” Mr. Castevet said, “I’m from right here in New York City. I’ve

been there though. I’ve been everywhere. Literally.” He sipped Vodka
Blush, sitting with his legs crossed and a hand on his knee. He was wearing
black loafers with tassels, gray slacks, a white blouse, and a blue-and-gold
striped ascot. “Every continent, every country,” he said. “Every major city.
You name a place and I’ve been there. Go ahead. Name a place.”

Guy said, “Fairbanks, Alaska.”
“I’ve been there,” Mr. Castevet said. “I’ve been all over Alaska;

Fairbanks, Juneau, Anchorage, Nome, Seward; I spent four months there in
1938 and I’ve made a lot of one-day stop-overs in Fairbanks and Anchorage
on my way to places in the Far East. I’ve been in small towns in Alaska too;
Dillingham and Akulurak.”

“Where are you folks from?” Mrs. Castevet asked, fixing the folds at the

bosom of her dress.

“I’m from Omaha,” Rosemary said, “and Guy is from Baltimore.”
“Omaha is a good city,” Mr. Castevet said. “Baltimore is too.”
“Did you travel for business reasons?” Rosemary asked him.
“Business and pleasure both,” he said. “I’m seventy-nine years old and

I’ve been going one place or another since I was ten. You name it, I’ve been
there.”

“What business were you in?” Guy asked.
“Just about every business,” Mr. Castevet said. “Wool, sugar, toys,

machine parts, marine insurance, oil…”

A bell pinged in the kitchen. “Steak’s ready,” Mrs. Castevet said,

standing up with her glass in her hand. “Don’t rush your drinks now; take
them along to the table. Roman, take your pill.”

“I heard on TV that he’s going to postpone and wait till it’s over,” Mrs.

Castevet said.

Guy smiled. “Well,” he said, “that’s show biz.”
Mr. and Mrs. Castevet laughed, and Guy along with them. Rosemary

smiled and cut her steak. It was overdone and juiceless, flanked by peas and
mashed potatoes under flour-laden gravy.

Still laughing, Mr. Castevet said, “It is, you know! That’s just what it is;

show biz!”

“You can say that again,” Guy said.
“The costumes, the rituals,” Mr. Castevet said; “every religion, not only

Catholicism. Pageants for the ignorant.”

Mrs. Castevet said, “I think we’re offending Rosemary.”
“No, no, not at all,” Rosemary said.
“You aren’t religious, my dear, are you?” Mr. Castevet asked.
“I was brought up to be,” Rosemary said, “but now I’m an agnostic. I

wasn’t offended. Really I wasn’t.”

“And you, Guy?” Mr. Castevet asked. “Are you an agnostic too?”
“I guess so,” Guy said. “I don’t see how anyone can be anything else. I

mean, there’s no absolute proof one way or the other, is there?”

“No, there isn’t,” Mr. Castevet said.
Mrs. Castevet, studying Rosemary, said, “You looked uncomfortable

before, when we were laughing at Guy’s little joke about the Pope.”

“Well he is the Pope,” Rosemary said. “I guess I’ve been conditioned to

have respect for him and I still do, even if I don’t think he’s holy any more.”

“If you don’t think he’s holy,” Mr. Castevet said, “you should have no

respect for him at all, because he’s going around deceiving people and
pretending he is holy.”

“Good point,” Guy said.
“When I think what they spend on robes and jewels,” Mrs. Castevet

said.

“A good picture of the hypocrisy behind organized religion,” Mr.

Castevet said, “was given, I thought, in Luther. Did you ever get to play the
leading part, Guy?”

“Me? No,” Guy said.
“Weren’t you Albert Finney’s understudy?” Mr. Castevet asked.

“No,” Guy said, “the fellow who played Weinand was. I just covered

two of the smaller parts.”

“That’s strange,” Mr. Castevet said; “I was quite certain that you were

his understudy. I remember being struck by a gesture you made and
checking in the program to see who you were; and I could swear you were
listed as Finney’s understudy.”

“What gesture do you mean?” Guy asked.
“I’m not sure now; a movement of your—”
“I used to do a thing with my arms when Luther had the fit, a sort of

involuntary reaching—”

“Exactly,” Mr. Castevet said. “That’s just what I meant. It had a

wonderful authenticity to it. In contrast, may I say, to everything Mr. Finney
was doing.”

“Oh, come on now,” Guy said.
“I thought his performance was considerably overrated,” Mr. Castevet

said. “I’d be most curious to see what you would have done with the part.”

Laughing, Guy said, “That makes two of us,” and cast a bright-eyed

glance at Rosemary. She smiled back, pleased that Guy was pleased; there
would be no reproofs from him now for an evening wasted talking with Ma
and Pa Settle. No, Kettle.

“My father was a theatrical producer,” Mr. Castevet said, “and my early

years were spent in the company of such people as Mrs. Fiske and Forbes-
Robertson, Otis Skinner and Modjeska. I tend, therefore, to look for
something more than mere competence in actors. You have a most
interesting inner quality, Guy. It appears in your television work too, and it
should carry you very far indeed; provided, of course, that you get those
initial ‘breaks’ upon which even the greatest actors are to some degree
dependent. Are you preparing for a show now?”

“I’m up for a couple of parts,” Guy said.
“I can’t believe that you won’t get them,” Mr. Castevet said.
“I can,” Guy said.
Mr. Castevet stared at him. “Are you serious?” he asked.
Dessert was a homemade Boston cream pie that, though better than the

steak and vegetables, had for Rosemary a peculiar and unpleasant
sweetness. Guy, however, praised it heartily and ate a second helping.

Perhaps he was only acting, Rosemary thought; repaying compliments with
compliments.

The kitchen, opening off the foyer, was small, and made smaller still by

the miniature greenhouse Terry had mentioned. Some three feet long, it
stood on a large white table near the room’s one window. Goosenecked
lamps leaned close around it, their bright bulbs reflecting in the glass and
making it blinding white rather than transparent. In the remaining space the
sink, stove, and refrigerator stood close together with cabinets jutting out
above them on all sides. Rosemary wiped dishes at Mrs. Castevet’s elbow,
working diligently and conscientiously in the pleasing knowledge that her
own kitchen was larger and more graciously equipped. “Terry told me about
that greenhouse,” she said.

“Oh yes,” Mrs. Castevet said. “It’s a nice hobby. You ought to do it

too.”

“I’d like to have a spice garden some day,” Rosemary said. “Out of the

city, of course. If Guy ever gets a movie offer we’re going to grab it and go
live in Los Angeles. I’m a country girl at heart.”

“Do you come from a big family?” Mrs. Castevet asked.
“Yes,” Rosemary said. “I have three brothers and two sisters. I’m the

baby.”

“Are your sisters married?”
“Yes, they are.”
Mrs. Castevet pushed a soapy sponge up and down inside a glass. “Do

they have children?” she asked.

“One has two and the other has four,” Rosemary said. “At least that was

the count the last I heard. It could be three and five by now.”

“Well that’s a good sign for you,” Mrs. Castevet said, still soaping the

glass. She was a slow and thorough washer. “If your sisters have lots of
children, chances are you will too. Things like that go in families.”

“Oh, we’re fertile, all right,” Rosemary said, waiting towel in hand for

the glass. “My brother Eddie has eight already and he’s only twenty-six.”

“My goodness!” Mrs. Castevet said. She rinsed the glass and gave it to

Rosemary.

“All told I’ve got twenty nieces and nephews,” Rosemary said. “I

haven’t even seen half of them.”

“Don’t you go home every once in a while?” Mrs. Castevet asked.
“No, I don’t,” Rosemary said. “I’m not on the best of terms with my

family, except one brother. They feel I’m the black sheep.”

“Oh? How is that?”
“Because Guy isn’t Catholic, and we didn’t have a church wedding.”
“Tsk,” Mrs. Castevet said. “Isn’t it something the way people fuss about

religion? Well, it’s their loss, not yours; don’t you let it bother you any.”

“That’s more easily said than done,” Rosemary said, putting the glass

on a shelf. “Would you like me to wash and you wipe for a while?”

“No, this is fine, dear,” Mrs. Castevet said.
Rosemary looked outside the door. She could see only the end of the

living room that was bridge tables and file cabinets; Guy and Mr. Castevet
were at the other end. A plane of blue cigarette smoke lay motionless in the
air.

“Rosemary?”
She turned. Mrs. Castevet, smiling, held out a wet plate in a green

rubber-gloved hand.

“Now Roman, you stop bending Guy’s ear with your Modjeska stories,”

Mrs. Castevet said. “He’s only listening ’cause he’s polite.”

“No, it’s interesting, Mrs. Castevet,” Guy said.
“You see?” Mr. Castevet said.

“Minnie,” Mrs. Castevet told Guy. “I’m Minnie and he’s Roman;

okay?” She looked mock-defiantly at Rosemary. “Okay?”

Guy laughed. “Okay, Minnie,” he said.
They talked about the Goulds and the Bruhns and Dubin-and-DeVore;

about Terry’s sailor brother who had turned out to be in a civilian hospital in
Saigon; and, because Mr. Castevet was reading a book critical of the Warren
Report, about the Kennedy assassination. Rosemary, in one of the straight-
backed chairs, felt oddly out of things, as if the Castevets were old friends
of Guy’s to whom she had just been introduced. “Do you think it could have
been a plot of some kind?” Mr. Castevet asked her, and she answered
awkwardly, aware that a considerate host was drawing a left-out guest into
conversation. She excused herself and followed Mrs. Castevet’s directions
to the bathroom, where there were flowered paper towels inscribed For Our
Guest and a book called Jokes for The John that wasn’t especially funny.

They left at ten-thirty, saying “Good-by, Roman” and “Thank you,

Minnie” and shaking hands with an enthusiasm and an implied promise of
more such evenings together that, on Rosemary’s part, was completely
false. Rounding the first bend in the hallway and hearing the door close
behind them, she blew out a relieved sigh and grinned happily at Guy when
she saw him doing exactly the same.

“Naow Roman,” he said, working his eyebrows comically, “yew stop

bendin’ Guy’s ee-yurs with them thar Mojesky sto-rees!”

Laughing, Rosemary cringed and hushed him, and they ran hand in

hand on ultra-quiet tiptoes to their own door, which they unlocked, opened,
slammed, locked, bolted, chained; and Guy nailed it over with imaginary
beams, pushed up three imaginary boulders, hoisted an imaginary
drawbridge, and mopped his brow and panted while Rosemary bent over
double and laughed into both hands.

“About that steak,” Guy said.
“Oh my God!” Rosemary said. “The pie! How did you eat two pieces of

it? It was weird!”

“Dear girl,” Guy said, “that was an act of superhuman courage and self-

sacrifice. I said to myself, ‘Ye gods, I’ll bet nobody’s ever asked this old bat
for seconds on anything in her entire life!’ So I did it.” He waved a hand
grandly. “Now and again I get these noble urges.”

said, “and when they’re full-grown she throws them out the window.”

“Shh, the walls have ears,” Guy said. “Hey, how about that silverware?”
“Isn’t that funny?” Rosemary said, working her feet against the floor to

unshoe them; “only three dinner plates that match, and they’ve got that
beautiful, beautiful silver.”

“Let’s be nice; maybe they’ll will it to us.”
“Let’s be nasty and buy our own. Did you go to the bathroom?”
“There? No.”
“Guess what they’ve got in it.”
“A bidet.”
“No, Jokes for The John.”
“No.”
Rosemary shucked off her dress. “A book on a hook,” she said. “Right

next to the toilet.”

Guy smiled and shook his head. He began taking out his cufflinks,

standing beside the armoire. “Those stories of Roman’s, though,” he said,
“were pretty damn interesting, actually. I’d never even heard of Forbes-
Robertson before, but he was a very big star in his day.” He worked at the
second link, having trouble with it. “I’m going to go over there again
tomorrow night and hear some more,” he said.

Rosemary looked at him, disconcerted. “You are?” she asked.
“Yes,” he said, “he asked me.” He held out his hand to her. “Can you

get this off for me?”

She went to him and worked at the link, feeling suddenly lost and

uncertain. “I thought we were going to do something with Jimmy and
Tiger,” she said.

“Was that definite?” he asked. His eyes looked into hers. “I thought we

were just going to call and see.”

“It wasn’t definite,” she said.
He shrugged. “We’ll see them Wednesday or Thursday.”
She got the link out and held it on her palm. He took it. “Thanks,” he

said. “You don’t have to come along if you don’t want to; you can stay
here.”

“I think I will,” she said. “Stay here.” She went to the bed and sat down.

“He knew Henry Irving too,” Guy said. “It’s really terrifically

interesting.”

Rosemary unhooked her stockings. “Why did they take down the

pictures,” she said.

“What do you mean?”
“Their pictures; they took them down. In the living room and in the

hallway leading back to the bathroom. There are hooks in the wall and
clean places. And the one picture that is there, over the mantel, doesn’t fit.
There are two inches of clean at both sides of it.”

Guy looked at her. “I didn’t notice,” he said.
“And why do they have all those files and things in the living room?”

she asked.

“That he told me,” Guy said, taking off his shirt. “He puts out a

newsletter for stamp collectors. All over the world. That’s why they get so
much foreign mail.”

four other rooms, all with the doors closed. Why doesn’t he use one of
those?”

Guy went to her, shirt in hand, and pressed her nose with a firm

fingertip. “You’re getting nosier than Minnie,” he said, kissed air at her, and
went out to the bathroom.

She was twenty-four and they wanted three children two years apart;

but Guy “wasn’t ready yet”—nor would he ever be ready, she feared, until
he was as big as Marlon Brando and Richard Burton put together. Didn’t he
know how handsome and talented he was, how sure to succeed? So her plan
was to get pregnant by “accident” the pills gave her headaches, she said,
and rubber gadgets were repulsive. Guy said that subconsciously she was
still a good Catholic, and she protested enough to support the explanation.

Indulgently he studied the calendar and avoided the “dangerous days,” and
she said, “No, it’s safe today, darling; I’m sure it is.”

And again this month he had won and she had lost, in this undignified

contest in which he didn’t even know they were engaged. “Damn!” she
said, and banged the coffee can down on the stove. Guy, in the den, called,
“What happened?”

“I bumped my elbow!” she called back.
At least she knew now why she had become depressed during the

evening.

Double damn! If they were living together and not married she would

have been pregnant fifty times by now!

“Hi, dear, we’re not bothering you, are we?” Mrs. Castevet said when

Rosemary had opened the door. “This is my dear friend Laura-Louise
McBurney, who lives up on twelve. Laura-Louise, this is Guy’s wife
Rosemary.”

“Hello, Rosemary! Welcome to the Bram!”
“Laura-Louise just met Guy over to our place and she wanted to meet

you too, so we came on over. Guy said you were staying in not doing
anything. Can we come in?”

With resigned good grace Rosemary showed them into the living room.
“Oh, you’ve got new chairs,” Mrs. Castevet said. “Aren’t they

beautiful!”

“They came this morning,” Rosemary said.
“Are you all right, dear? You look worn.”
“I’m fine,” Rosemary said and smiled. “It’s the first day of my period.”
“And you’re up and around?” Laura-Louise asked, sitting. “On my first

days I experienced such pain that I couldn’t move or eat or anything. Dan

had to give me gin through a straw to kill the pain and we were one-
hundred-per-cent Temperance at the time, with that one exception.”

“Girls today take things more in their stride than we did,” Mrs. Castevet

said, sitting too. “They’re healthier than we were, thanks to vitamins and
better medical care.”

Both women had brought identical green sewing bags and, to

Rosemary’s surprise, were opening them now and taking out crocheting
(Laura-Louise) and darning (Mrs. Castevet); settling down for a long
evening of needlework and conversation. “What’s that over there?” Mrs.
Castevet asked. “Seat covers?”

“Cushions for the window seats,” Rosemary said, and thinking Oh all

right, I will, went over and got the work and brought it back and joined
them.

apartment, Rosemary.”

“Oh, before I forget,” Mrs. Castevet said, “this is for you. From Roman

and me.” She put a small packet of pink tissue paper into Rosemary’s hand,
with a hardness inside it.

“For me?” Rosemary asked. “I don’t understand.”
“It’s just a little present is all,” Mrs. Castevet said, dismissing

Rosemary’s puzzlement with quick hand-waves. “For moving in.”

“But there’s no reason for you to…” Rosemary unfolded the leaves of

used-before tissue paper. Within the pink was Terry’s silver filigree ball-
charm and its clustered-together neckchain. The smell of the ball’s filling
made Rosemary pull her head away.

“It’s real old,” Mrs. Castevet said. “Over three hundred years.”
“It’s lovely,” Rosemary said, examining the ball and wondering whether

she should tell that Terry had shown it to her. The moment for doing so
slipped by.

“The green inside is called tannis root,” Mrs. Castevet said. “It’s good

luck.”

Not for Terry, Rosemary thought, and said, “It’s lovely, but I can’t

accept such a—”

“You already have,” Mrs. Castevet said, darning a brown sock and not

looking at Rosemary. “Put it on.”

Laura-Louise said, “You’ll get used to the smell before you know it.”

“Go on,” Mrs. Castevet said.
“Well, thank you,” Rosemary said; and uncertainly she put the chain

over her head and tucked the ball into the collar of her dress. It dropped
down between her breasts, cold for a moment and obtrusive. I’ll take it off
when they go, she thought.

Laura-Louise said, “A friend of ours made the chain entirely by hand.

He’s a retired dentist and his hobby is making jewelry out of silver and
gold. You’ll meet him at Minnie and Roman’s on—on some night soon, I’m
sure, because they entertain so much. You’ll probably meet all their friends,
all our friends.”

Rosemary looked up from her work and saw Laura-Louise pink with an

embarrassment that had hurried and confused her last words. Minnie was
busy darning, unaware. Laura-Louise smiled and Rosemary smiled back.

“Do you make your own clothes?” Laura-Louise asked.
“No, I don’t,” Rosemary said, letting the subject be changed. “I try to

every once in a while but nothing ever hangs right.”

It turned out to be a fairly pleasant evening. Minnie told some amusing

stories about her girlhood in Oklahoma, and Laura-Louise showed
Rosemary two useful sewing tricks and explained feelingly how Buckley,
the Conservative mayoral candidate, could win the coming election despite
the high odds against him.

Guy came back at eleven, quiet and oddly self-contained. He said hello

to the women and, by Rosemary’s chair, bent and kissed her cheek. Minnie
said, “Eleven? My land! Come on, Laura-Louise.” Laura-Louise said,
“Come and visit me any time you want, Rosemary; I’m in twelve F.” The
two women closed their sewing bags and went quickly away.

“Were his stories as interesting as last night?” Rosemary asked.
“Yes,” Guy said. “Did you have a nice time?”
“All right. I got some work done.”
“So I see.”
“I got a present too.”
She showed him the charm. “It was Terry’s,” she said. “They gave it to

her; she showed it to me. The police must have—given it back.”

“She probably wasn’t even wearing it,” Guy said.
“I’ll bet she was. She was as proud of it as—as if it was the first gift

held the chain and the charm on her palm, jiggling them and looking at
them.

“Aren’t you going to wear it?” Guy asked.
“It smells,” she said. “There’s stuff in it called tannis root.” She held out

her hand. “From the famous greenhouse.”

Guy smelled and shrugged. “It’s not bad,” he said.
Rosemary went into the bedroom and opened a drawer in the vanity

where she had a tin Louis Sherry box full of odds and ends. “Tannis,
anybody?” she asked herself in the mirror, and put the charm in the box,
closed it, and closed the drawer.

Guy, in the doorway, said, “If you took it, you ought to wear it.”

Roman’s stories of old-time stars, Rosemary thought, might have

depressed him by reminding him that his own career was lagging behind
Henry Irving’s and Forbes-Whosit’s. His going back for more of the stories
might have been a form of masochism.

She touched his arm and told him not to worry.
“About what?”
“About anything.”
“All right,” he said, “I won’t.”
“You’re the greatest,” she said. “You know? You are. And it’s all going

to come out right. You’re going to have to learn karate to get rid of the
photographers.”

He smiled in the glow of his cigarette.
“Any day now,” she said. “Something big. Something worthy of you.”
“I know,” he said. “Go to sleep, honey.”
“Okay. Watch the cigarette.”
“I will.”
“Wake me if you can’t sleep.”
“Sure.”
“I love you.”

“I love you, Ro.”

Hutch had seen it too, though, so Rosemary went with Joan Jellico, who

confided during dinner at the Bijou that she and Dick were separating, no
longer having anything in common except their address. The news upset
Rosemary. For days Guy had been distant and preoccupied, wrapped in
something he would neither put aside nor share. Had Joan and Dick’s
estrangement begun in the same way? She grew angry at Joan, who was
wearing too much make-up and applauding too loudly in the small theater.
No wonder she and Dick could find nothing in common; she was loud and
vulgar, he was reserved, sensitive; they should never have married in the
first place.

When Rosemary came home Guy was coming out of the shower, more

vivacious and there than he had been all week. Rosemary’s spirits leaped.
The show had been even better than she expected, she told him, and bad
news, Joan and Dick were separating. They really were birds of completely
different feathers though, weren’t they? How had the Wait Until Dark scene
gone? Great. He had it down cold.

“Damn that tannis root,” Rosemary said. The whole bedroom smelled of

it. The bitter prickly odor had even found its way into the bathroom. She
got a piece of aluminum foil from the kitchen and wound the charm in a
tight triple wrapping, twisting the ends to seal them.

“It’ll probably lose its strength in a few days,” Guy said.
“It better,” Rosemary said, spraying the air with a deodorant bomb. “If

it doesn’t, I’m going to throw it away and tell Minnie I lost it.”

They made love—Guy was wild and driving—and later, through the

wall, Rosemary heard a party in progress at Minnie and Roman’s; the same
flat unmusical singing she had heard the last time, almost like religious

chanting, and the same flute or clarinet weaving in and around and
underneath it.

She went to the bedroom door.
“Oh God,” Guy said.
He was sitting on the bed, the phone in one hand and a can of Red Devil

paint remover in the other. He didn’t look at her. “And they don’t have any
idea what’s causing it?” he said. “My God, that’s awful, just awful.” He
listened, and straightened as he sat. “Yes, I am,” he said. And then, “Yes, I
would. I’d hate to get it this way, but I—” He listened again. “Well, you’d
have to speak to Allan about that end of it,” he said—Allan Stone, his agent
—“but I’m sure there won’t be any problem, Mr. Weiss, not as far as we’re
concerned.”

He had it. The Something Big. Rosemary held her breath, waiting.
“Thank you, Mr. Weiss,” Guy said. “And will you let me know if there’s

any news? Thanks.”

He hung up and shut his eyes. He sat motionless, his hand staying on

the phone. He was pale and dummylike, a Pop Art wax statue with real
clothes and props, real phone, real can of paint remover.

“Guy?” Rosemary said.
He opened his eyes and looked at her.
“What is it?” she asked.
He blinked and came alive. “Donald Baumgart,” he said. “He’s gone

blind. He woke up yesterday and—he can’t see.”

“Oh no,” Rosemary said.

sedation.”

They looked painfully at each other.
“I’ve got the part,” Guy said. “It’s a hell of a way to get it.” He looked

at the paint remover in his hand and put it on the night table. “Listen,” he
said, “I’ve got to get out and walk around.” He stood up. “I’m sorry. I’ve
got to get outside and absorb this.”

“I understand, go ahead,” Rosemary said, standing back from the

doorway.

He went as he was, down the hall and out the door, letting it swing

closed after him with its own soft slam.

She went into the living room, thinking of poor Donald Baumgart and

lucky Guy; lucky she-and-Guy, with the good part that would get attention
even if the show folded, would lead to other parts, to movies maybe, to a
house in Los Angeles, a spice garden, three children two years apart. Poor
Donald Baumgart with his clumsy name that he didn’t change. He must
have been good, to have won out over Guy, and there he was in Bellevue,
blind and wanting to kill himself, under sedation.

Kneeling on a window seat, Rosemary looked out the side of its bay and

watched the house’s entrance far below, waiting to see Guy come out. When
would rehearsals begin? she wondered. She would go out of town with him,
of course; what fun it would be! Boston? Philadelphia? Washington would
be exciting. She had never been there. While Guy was rehearsing
afternoons, she could sightsee; and evenings, after the performance,
everyone would meet in a restaurant or club to gossip and exchange
rumors…

She waited and watched but he didn’t come out. He must have used the

Fifty-fifth Street door.

“Nothing,” he said. “Don’t you have your sculpture class today?”

“I haven’t gone in two months.”
“Why don’t you go?”
She went; tore away old plasticine, reset the armature, and began anew,

doing a new model among new students. “Where’ve you been?” the
instructor asked. He had eyeglasses and an Adam’s apple and made
miniatures of her torso without watching his hands.

“In Zanzibar,” she said.
“Zanzibar is no more,” he said, smiling nervously. “It’s Tanzania.”
One afternoon she went down to Macy’s and Gimbels, and when she

came home there were roses in the kitchen, roses in the living room, and
Guy coming out of the bedroom with one rose and a forgive-me smile, like
a reading he had once done for her of Chance Wayne in Sweet Bird.

“I’ve been a living turd,” he said. “It’s from sitting around hoping that

Baumgart won’t regain his sight, which is what I’ve been doing, rat that I
am.”

“That’s natural,” she said. “You’re bound to feel two ways about—”
“Listen,” he said, pushing the rose to her nose, “even if this thing falls

through, even if I’m Charley Cresta Blanca for the rest of my days, I’m
going to stop giving you the short end of the stick.”

“You haven’t—”
“Yes I have. I’ve been so busy tearing my hair out over my career that I

haven’t given Thought One to yours. Let’s have a baby, okay? Let’s have
three, one at a time.”

She looked at him.
“A baby,” he said. “You know. Goo, goo? Diapers? Waa, waa?”
“Do you mean it?” she asked.
“Sure I mean it,” he said. “I even figured out the right time to start. Next

Monday and Tuesday. Red circles on the calendar, please.”

“You really mean it, Guy?” she asked, tears in her eyes.
“No, I’m kidding,” he said. “Sure I mean it. Look, Rosemary, for God’s

sake don’t cry, all right? Please. It’s going to upset me very much if you cry,
so stop right now, all right?”

“All right,” she said. “I won’t cry.”
“I really went rose-nutty, didn’t I?” he said, looking around brightly.

“There’s a bunch in the bedroom too.”

She followed the Pope’s rounds on television during the afternoon,

moving the set out from the wall of the den (soon nursery) and turning it so
she could watch from the kitchen while readying the fish and vegetables
and salad greens. His speech at the UN moved her, and she was sure it
would help ease the Vietnam situation. “War never again,” he said;
wouldn’t his words give pause to even the most hard-headed statesman?

At four-thirty, while she was setting the table before the fireplace, the

telephone rang.

“Rosemary? How are you?”
“Fine,” she said. “How are you?” It was Margaret, the older of her two

sisters.

“Fine,” Margaret said.
“Where are you?”

“In Omaha.”
They had never got on well. Margaret had been a sullen, resentful girl,

too often used by their mother as the caretaker of the younger children. To
be called by her like this was strange; strange and frightening.

“Is everyone all right?” Rosemary asked. Someone’s dead, she thought.

Who? Ma? Pa? Brian?

“Yes, everyone’s fine.”
“They are?”
“Yes. Are you?”
“Yes; I said I was.”
“I’ve had the funniest feeling all day long, Rosemary. That something

happened to you. Like an accident or something. That you were hurt.
Maybe in the hospital.”

“Well, I’m not,” Rosemary said, and laughed. “I’m fine. Really I am.”
“It was such a strong feeling,” Margaret said. “I was sure something had

happened. Finally Gene said why don’t I call you and find out.”

“How is he?”
“Fine.”
“And the children?”
“Oh, the usual scrapes and scratches, but they’re fine too. I’ve got

another one on the way, you know.”

“No, I didn’t know. That’s wonderful. When is it due?” We’ll have one

on the way soon too.

“The end of March. How’s your husband, Rosemary?”
“He’s fine. He’s got an important part in a new play that’s going into

rehearsal soon.”

must be terrific excitement there.”

“There is,” Rosemary said. “I’ve been watching it on television. It’s in

Omaha too, isn’t it?”

“Not live? You didn’t go out and see him live?”
“No, I didn’t.”
“Really?”
“Really.”
“Honest to goodness, Rosemary,” Margaret said. “Do you know Ma and

Pa were going to fly there to see him but they couldn’t because there’s going

to be a strike vote and Pa’s seconding the motion? Lots of people did fly,
though; the Donovans, and Dot and Sandy Wallingford; and you’re right
there, living there, and didn’t go out and see him?”

“Religion doesn’t mean as much to me now as it did back home,”

Rosemary said.

“Well,” Margaret said, “I guess that’s inevitable,” and Rosemary heard,

unspoken, when you’re married to a Protestant. She said, “It was nice of
you to call, Margaret. There’s nothing for you to worry about. I’ve never
been healthier or happier.”

“It was such a strong feeling,” Margaret said. “From the minute I woke

up. I’m so used to taking care of you little brats…”

“Give my love to everyone, will you? And tell Brian to answer my

letter.”

“I will. Rosemary—”
“Yes?”
“I still have the feeling. Stay home tonight, will you?”
“That’s just what we’re planning to do,” Rosemary said, looking over at

the partially set table.

“Good,” Margaret said. “Take care of yourself.”
“I will,” Rosemary said. “You too, Margaret.”
“I will. Good-by.”
“Good-by.”
She went back to setting the table, feeling pleasantly sad and nostalgic

for Margaret and Brian and the other kids, for Omaha and the irretrievable
past.

With the table set, she bathed; then powdered and perfumed herself, did

her eyes and lips and hair, and put on a pair of burgundy silk lounging
pajamas that Guy had given her the previous Christmas.

“What?”
“I forgot the pie.”

all-time favorite, a Horn and Hardart pumpkin pie.

“I could kick myself,” he said. “I passed two of those damn retail stores;

not one but two.”

“It’s all right,” Rosemary said. “We can have fruit and cheese. That’s

the best dessert anyway, really.”

“It is not; Horn and Hardart pumpkin pie is.”
He went in to wash up and she put a tray of stuffed mushrooms into the

oven and mixed the salad dressing.

In a few minutes Guy came to the kitchen door, buttoning the collar of a

blue velour shirt. He was bright-eyed and a bit on edge, the way he had
been the first time they slept together, when he knew it was going to
happen. It pleased Rosemary to see him that way.

“Your pal the Pope really loused up traffic today,” he said.
“Did you see any of the television?” she asked. “They’ve had fantastic

coverage.”

“I got a glimpse up at Allan’s,” he said. “Glasses in the freezer?”
“Yes. He made a wonderful speech at the UN. ‘War never again,’ he

told them.”

“Rotsa ruck. Hey, those look good.”
They had Gibsons and the stuffed mushrooms in the living room. Guy

put crumpled newspaper and sticks of kindling on the fireplace grate, and
two big chunks of cannel coal. “Here goes nothing,” he said, and struck a
match and lit the paper. It flamed high and caught the kindling. Dark smoke
began spilling out over the front of the mantel and up toward the ceiling.
“Good grief,” Guy said, and groped inside the fireplace. “The paint, the
paint!” Rosemary cried.

He got the flue opened; and the air conditioner, set at exhaust, drew out

the smoke.

“Nobody, but nobody, has a fire tonight,” Guy said.
Rosemary, kneeling with her drink and staring into the spitting flame-

wrapped coals, said, “Isn’t it gorgeous? I hope we have the coldest winter in
eighty years.”

Guy put on Ella Fitzgerald singing Cole Porter.
They were halfway through the swordfish when the doorbell rang.

Rosemary cocked her head and listened.

The door opened and Minnie said, “Hi, Guy!” and more that was

unintelligible. Oh, no, Rosemary thought. Don’t let her in, Guy. Not now,
not tonight.

Guy spoke, and then Minnie again: “…extra. We don’t need them.” Guy

again and Minnie again. Rosemary eased out held-in breath; it didn’t sound
as if she was coming in, thank God.

The door closed and was chained (Good!) and bolted (Good!).

Rosemary watched and waited, and Guy sidled into the archway, smiling
smugly, with both hands behind his back. “Who says there’s nothing to
ESP?” he said, and coming toward the table brought forth his hands with
two white custard cups sitting one on each palm. “Madame and Monsieur
shall have ze dessairt after all,” he said, setting one cup by Rosemary’s
wineglass and the other by his own. “Mousse au chocolat,” he said, “or
‘chocolate mouse,’ as Minnie calls it. Of course with her it could be
chocolate mouse, so eat with care.”

Rosemary laughed happily. “That’s wonderful,” she said. “It’s what I

was going to make.”

“See?” Guy said, sitting. “ESP.” He replaced his napkin and poured

more wine.

“I was afraid she was going to come charging in and stay all evening,”

Rosemary said, forking up carrots.

“No,” Guy said, “she just wanted us to try her chocolate mouse, seein’

as how it’s one of her speci-al-ities.”

“It looks good.”
“It does, doesn’t it.”
The cups were filled with peaked swirls of chocolate. Guy’s was topped

with a sprinkling of chopped nuts, and Rosemary’s with a half walnut.

“It’s sweet of her, really,” Rosemary said. “We shouldn’t make fun of

her.”

“You’re right,” Guy said, “you’re right.”

“undertaste” at all, chalky or otherwise. Rosemary put her spoon down after
two swallows. Guy said, “Aren’t you going to finish it? That’s silly, honey;
there’s no ‘undertaste.’”

Rosemary said there was.
“Come on,” Guy said, “the old bat slaved all day over a hot stove; eat

it.”

“But I don’t like it,” Rosemary said.
“It’s delicious.”
“You can have mine.”
Guy scowled. “All right, don’t eat it,” he said; “you don’t wear the

charm she gave you, you might as well not eat her dessert too.”

Confused, Rosemary said, “What does one thing have to do with the

other?”

“They’re both examples of—well, unkindness, that’s all.” Guy said.

“Two minutes ago you said we should stop making fun of her. That’s a form
of making fun too, accepting something and then not using it.”

“Oh—” Rosemary picked up her spoon. “If it’s going to turn into a big

scene—” She took a full spoonful of the mousse and thrust it into her
mouth.

“It isn’t going to turn into a big scene,” Guy said. “Look, if you really

can’t stand it, don’t eat it.”

“Delicious,” Rosemary said, full-mouthed and taking another spoonful,

“no undertaste at all. Turn the records over.”

Guy got up and went to the record player. Rosemary doubled her napkin

in her lap and plopped two spoonfuls of the mousse into it, and another
half-spoonful for good measure. She folded the napkin closed and then
showily scraped clean the inside of the cup and swallowed down the
scrapings as Guy came back to the table. “There, Daddy,” she said, tilting
the cup toward him. “Do I get a gold star on my chart?”

“Two of them,” he said. “I’m sorry if I was stuffy.”
“You were.”
“I’m sorry.” He smiled.
Rosemary melted. “You’re forgiven,” she said. “It’s nice that you’re

considerate of old ladies. It means you’ll be considerate of me when I’m
one.”

They had coffee and crème de menthe.

“Margaret called this afternoon,” Rosemary said.
“Margaret?”
“My sister.”
“Oh. Everything okay?”
“Yes. She was afraid something had happened to me. She had a

feeling.”

“Oh?”
“We’re to stay home tonight.”
“Drat. And I made a reservation at Nedick’s. In the Orange Room.”
“You’ll have to cancel it.”
“How come you turned out sane when the rest of your family is nutty?”

“I’ll be in in a minute,” Rosemary said.
Shaking her head to clear it, she rolled the napkins up inside the

tablecloth and put the bundle aside for the hamper. She put the stopper in
the drain, turned on the hot water, squeezed in some Joy, and began loading
in the dishes and pans. She would do them in the morning, let them soak
overnight.

The second wave came as she was hanging up the dish towel. It lasted

longer, and this time the room turned slowly around and her legs almost
slued out from under her. She hung on to the edge of the sink.

When it was over she said “Oh boy,” and added up two Gibsons, two

glasses of wine (or had it been three?), and one crème de menthe. No
wonder.

She made it to the doorway of the den and kept her footing through the

next wave by holding on to the knob with one hand and the jamb with the
other.

“What is it?” Guy asked, standing up anxiously.
“Dizzy,” she said, and smiled.

surely around the waist. “No wonder,” he said. “All that booze. You
probably had an empty stomach, too.”

He helped her toward the bedroom and, when her legs buckled, caught

her up and carried her. He put her down on the bed and sat beside her,
taking her hand and stroking her forehead sympathetically. She closed her
eyes. The bed was a raft that floated on gentle ripples, tilting and swaying
pleasantly. “Nice,” she said.

“Sleep is what you need,” Guy said, stroking her forehead. “A good

night’s sleep.”

“We have to make a baby.”
“We will. Tomorrow. There’s plenty of time.”
“Missing the mass.”
“Sleep. Get a good night’s sleep. Go on…”
“Just a nap,” she said, and was sitting with a drink in her hand on

President Kennedy’s yacht. It was sunny and breezy, a perfect day for a
cruise. The President, studying a large map, gave terse and knowing
instructions to a Negro mate.

Guy had taken off the top of her pajamas. “Why are you taking them

off?” she asked.

“To make you more comfortable,” he said.
“I’m comfortable.”
“Sleep, Ro.”
He undid the snaps at her side and slowly drew off the bottoms.

Thought she was asleep and didn’t know. Now she had nothing on at all
except a red bikini, but the other women on the yacht—Jackie Kennedy, Pat
Lawford, and Sarah Churchill—were wearing bikinis too, so it was all right,
thank goodness. The President was in his Navy uniform. He had completely
recovered from the assassination and looked better than ever. Hutch was
standing on the dock with armloads of weather-forecasting equipment.
“Isn’t Hutch coming with us?” Rosemary asked the President.

“Catholics only,” he said, smiling. “I wish we weren’t bound by these

prejudices, but unfortunately we are.”

“But what about Sarah Churchill?” Rosemary asked. She turned to

point, but Sarah Churchill was gone and the family was there in her place:

Ma, Pa, and everybody, with the husbands, wives, and children. Margaret
was pregnant, and so were Jean and Dodie and Ernestine.

Guy was taking off her wedding ring. She wondered why, but was too

tired to ask. “Sleep,” she said, and slept.

It was the first time the Sistine Chapel had been opened to the public

and she was inspecting the ceiling on a new elevator that carried the visitor
through the chapel horizontally, making it possible to see the frescoes
exactly as Michelangelo, painting them, had seen them. How glorious they
were! She saw God extending his finger to Adam, giving him the divine
spark of life; and the underside of a shelf partly covered with gingham
contact paper as she was carried backward through the linen closet. “Easy,”
Guy said, and another man said, “You’ve got her too high.”

“Typhoon!” Hutch shouted from the dock amid all his weather-

forecasting equipment. “Typhoon! It killed fifty-five people in London and
it’s heading this way!” And Rosemary knew he was right. She must warn
the President. The ship was heading for disaster.

But the President was gone. Everyone was gone. The deck was infinite

and bare, except for, far away, the Negro mate holding the wheel
unremittingly on its course.

Rosemary went to him and saw at once that he hated all white people,

hated her. “You’d better go down below, Miss,” he said, courteous but
hating her, not even waiting to hear the warning she had brought.

Below was a huge ballroom where on one side a church burned fiercely

and on the other a black-bearded man stood glaring at her. In the center was
a bed. She went to it and lay down, and was suddenly surrounded by naked
men and women, ten or a dozen, with Guy among them. They were elderly,
the women grotesque and slack-breasted. Minnie and her friend Laura-
Louise were there, and Roman in a black miter and a black silk robe. With a
thin black wand he was drawing designs on her body, dipping the wand’s
point in a cup of red held for him by a sun-browned man with a white
moustache. The point moved back and forth across her stomach and down
ticklingly to the insides of her thighs. The naked people were chanting—
flat, unmusical, foreign-tongued syllables—and a flute or clarinet
accompanied them. “She’s awake, she sees!” Guy whispered to Minnie. He
was large-eyed, tense. “She don’t see,” Minnie said. “As long as she ate the
mouse she can’t see nor hear. She’s like dead. Now sing.”

satin embroidered with pearls. “I’m so sorry to hear you aren’t feeling
well,” she said, hurrying to Rosemary’s side.

Rosemary explained about the mouse-bite, minimizing it so Jackie

wouldn’t worry.

“You’d better have your legs tied down,” Jackie said, “in case of

convulsions.”

“Yes, I suppose so,” Rosemary said. “There’s always a chance it was

rabid.” She watched with interest as white-smocked interns tied her legs,
and her arms too, to the four bedposts.

“If the music bothers you,” Jackie said, “let me know and I’ll have it

stopped.”

“Oh, no,” Rosemary said. “Please don’t change the program on my

account. It doesn’t bother me at all, really it doesn’t.”

Jackie smiled warmly at her. “Try to sleep,” she said. “We’ll be waiting

up on deck.” She withdrew, her satin gown whispering.

Rosemary slept a while, and then Guy came in and began making love

to her. He stroked her with both hands—a long, relishing stroke that began
at her bound wrists, slid down over her arms, breasts, and loins, and became
a voluptuous tickling between her legs. He repeated the exciting stroke
again and again, his hands hot and sharp-nailed, and then, when she was
ready-ready-more-than-ready, he slipped a hand in under her buttocks,
raised them, lodged his hardness against her, and pushed it powerfully in.
Bigger he was than always; painfully, wonderfully big. He lay forward upon
her, his other arm sliding under her back to hold her, his broad chest
crushing her breasts. (He was wearing, because it was to be a costume party,
a suit of coarse leathery armor.) Brutally, rhythmically, he drove his new
hugeness. She opened her eyes and looked into yellow furnace-eyes,
smelled sulphur and tannis root, felt wet breath on her mouth, heard lust-
grunts and the breathing of onlookers.

This is no dream, she thought. This is real, this is happening. Protest

woke in her eyes and throat, but something covered her face, smothering
her in a sweet stench.

The hugeness kept driving in her, the leathery body banging itself

against her again and again and again.

“Yes,” Rosemary said. “That’s why I didn’t come see you.” She spoke

sadly, so he wouldn’t suspect she had just had an orgasm.

“That’s all right,” he said. “We wouldn’t want you to jeopardize your

health.”

“Am I forgiven, Father?” she asked.
“Absolutely,” he said. He held out his hand for her to kiss the ring. Its

stone was a silver filigree ball less than an inch in diameter; inside it, very
tiny, Anna Maria Alberghetti sat waiting.

Rosemary kissed it and the Pope hurried out to catch his plane.

She pushed his hand away and turned over onto her stomach. “Five

minutes,” she said, deep in the pillow.

“No,” he said, and yanked her hair. “I’ve got to be at Dominick’s at

ten.”

“Eat out.”
“The hell I will.” He slapped her behind through the blanket.
Everything came back: the dreams, the drinks, Minnie’s chocolate

mousse, the Pope, that awful moment of not-dreaming. She turned back
over and raised herself on her arms, looking at Guy. He was lighting a
cigarette, sleep-rumpled, needing a shave. He had pajamas on. She was
nude.

“What time is it?” she asked.
“Ten after nine.”
“What time did I go to sleep?” She sat up.
“About eight-thirty,” he said. “And you didn’t go to sleep, honey; you

passed out. From now on you get cocktails or wine, not cocktails and
wine.”

“The dreams I had,” she said, rubbing her forehead and closing her

eyes. “President Kennedy, the Pope, Minnie and Roman…” She opened her
eyes and saw scratches on her left breast; two parallel hairlines of red
running down into the nipple. Her thighs stung; she pushed the blanket from
them and saw more scratches, seven or eight going this way and that.

“Don’t yell,” Guy said. “I already filed them down.” He showed short

smooth fingernails.

Rosemary looked at him uncomprehendingly.
“I didn’t want to miss Baby Night,” he said.
“You mean you—”
“And a couple of my nails were ragged.”
“While I was—out?”
He nodded and grinned. “It was kind of fun,” he said, “in a necrophile

sort of way.”

dreamed someone was—raping me,” she said. “I don’t know who. Someone
—unhuman.”

“Thanks a lot,” Guy said.
“You were there, and Minnie and Roman, other people…It was some

kind of ceremony.”

“I tried to wake you,” he said, “but you were out like a light.”
She turned further away and swung her legs out on the other side of the

bed.

“What’s the matter?” Guy asked.
“Nothing,” she said, sitting there, not looking around at him. “I guess I

feel funny about your doing it that way, with me unconscious.”

“I didn’t want to miss the night,” he said.
“We could have done it this morning or tonight. Last night wasn’t the

only split second in the whole month. And even if it had been…”

“I thought you would have wanted me to,” he said, and ran a finger up

her back.

She squirmed away from it. “It’s supposed to be shared, not one awake

and one asleep,” she said. Then: “Oh, I guess I’m being silly.” She got up
and went to the closet for her housecoat.

“I’m sorry I scratched you,” Guy said. “I was a wee bit loaded myself.”
She made breakfast and, when Guy had gone, did the sinkful of dishes

and put the kitchen to rights. She opened windows in the living room and
bedroom—the smell of last night’s fire still lingered in the apartment—
made the bed, and took a shower; a long one, first hot and then cold. She
stood capless and immobile under the downpour, waiting for her head to
clear and her thoughts to find an order and conclusion.

at this moment, actually pregnant? Oddly enough, she didn’t care. She was
unhappy—whether or not it was silly to be so. Guy had taken her without
her knowledge, had made love to her as a mindless body (“kind of fun in a
necrophile sort of way”) rather than as the complete mind-and-body person
she was; and had done so, moreover, with a savage gusto that had produced
scratches, aching soreness, and a nightmare so real and intense that she
could almost see on her stomach the designs Roman had drawn with his
red-dipped wand. She scrubbed soap on herself vigorously, resentfully.
True, he had done it for the best motive in the world, to make a baby, and
true too he had drunk as much as she had; but she wished that no motive
and no number of drinks could have enabled him to take her that way,
taking only her body without her soul or self or she-ness—whatever it was
he presumably loved. Now, looking back over the past weeks and months,
she felt a disturbing presence of overlooked signals just beyond memory,
signals of a shortcoming in his love for her, of a disparity between what he
said and what he felt. He was an actor; could anyone know when an actor
was true and not acting?

It would take more than a shower to wash away these thoughts. She

turned the water off and, between both hands, pressed out her streaming
hair.

On the way out to shop she rang the Castevets’ doorbell and returned

the cups from the mousse. “Did you like it, dear?” Minnie asked. “I think I
put a little too much cream de cocoa in it.”

“It was delicious,” Rosemary said. “You’ll have to give me the recipe.”
“I’d love to. You going marketing? Would you do me a teeny favor? Six

eggs and a small Instant Sanka; I’ll pay you later. I hate going out for just
one or two things, don’t you?”

locale. They had dinner with friends more evenings than not; when they
didn’t, they made natural-sounding conversation about furniture and the
ending-any-day-now newspaper strike and the World Series. They went to a
preview of a new musical and a screening of a new movie, to parties and
the opening of a friend’s exhibit of metal constructions. Guy seemed never
to be looking at her, always at a script or TV or at someone else. He was in
bed and asleep before she was. One evening he went to the Castevets’ to
hear more of Roman’s theater stories, and she stayed in the apartment and
watched Funny Face on TV.

“Don’t you think we ought to talk about it?” she said the next morning

at breakfast.

“About what?”
She looked at him; he seemed genuinely unknowing. “The

conversations we’ve been making,” she said.

“What do you mean?”
“The way you haven’t been looking at me.”
“What are you talking about? I’ve been looking at you.”
“No you haven’t.”
“I have so. Honey, what is it? What’s the matter?”
“Nothing. Never mind.”
“No, don’t say that. What is it? What’s bothering you?”
“Nothing.”
“Ah look, honey, I know I’ve been kind of preoccupied, with the part

and the crutches and all; is that it? Well gee whiz, Ro, it’s important, you
know? But it doesn’t mean I don’t love you, just because I’m not riveting
you with a passionate gaze all the time. I’ve got to think about practical
matters too.” It was awkward and charming and sincere, like his playing of
the cowboy in Bus Stop.

“All right,” Rosemary said. “I’m sorry I’m being pesty.”
“You? You couldn’t be pesty if you tried.”
He leaned across the table and kissed her.

possibly a week. “Guy’s getting into his new part,” she explained, “and I
really think it’ll be easier for him with me out of the way.”

“It’s yours,” Hutch said, and Rosemary went down to his apartment on

Lexington Avenue and Twenty-fourth Street to pick up the key.

She looked in first at a delicatessen where the clerks were friends from

her own days in the neighborhood, and then she went up to Hutch’s
apartment, which was small and dark and neat as a pin, with an inscribed
photo of Winston Churchill and a sofa that had belonged to Madame
Pompadour. Hutch was sitting barefoot between two bridge tables, each
with its typewriter and piles of paper. His practice was to write two books at
once, turning to the second when he struck a snag on the first, and back to
the first when he struck a snag on the second.

“I’m really looking forward to it,” Rosemary said, sitting on Madame

Pompadour’s sofa. “I suddenly realized the other day that I’ve never been
alone in my whole life—not for more than a few hours, that is. The idea of
three or four days is heaven.”

“A chance to sit quietly and find out who you are; where you’ve been

and where you’re going.”

“Exactly.”
“All right, you can stop forcing that smile,” Hutch said. “Did he hit you

with a lamp?”

“He didn’t hit me with anything,” Rosemary said. “It’s a very difficult

part, a crippled boy who pretends that he’s adjusted to his crippled-ness.
He’s got to work with crutches and leg-braces, and naturally he’s
preoccupied and—and, well, preoccupied.”

“I see,” Hutch said. “We’ll change the subject. The News had a lovely

rundown the other day of all the gore we missed during the strike. Why
didn’t you tell me you’d had another suicide up there at Happy House?”

“Oh, didn’t I tell you?” Rosemary asked.
“No, you didn’t,” Hutch said.
“It was someone we knew. The girl I told you about; the one who’d

been a drug addict and was rehabilitated by the Castevets, these people who
live on our floor. I’m sure I told you that.”

“The girl who was going to the basement with you.”
“That’s right.”

living with them?”

“Yes,” Rosemary said. “We’ve gotten to know them fairly well since it

happened. Guy goes over there once in a while to hear stories about the
theater. Mr. Castevet’s father was a producer around the turn of the
century.”

“I shouldn’t have thought Guy would be interested,” Hutch said. “An

elderly couple, I take it?”

“He’s seventy-nine; she’s seventy or so.”
“It’s an odd name,” Hutch said. “How is it spelled?”
Rosemary spelled it for him.
“I’ve never heard it before,” he said. “French, I suppose.”
“The name may be but they aren’t,” Rosemary said. “He’s from right

here and she’s from a place called—believe it or not—Bushyhead,
Oklahoma.”

“My God,” Hutch said. “I’m going to use that in a book. That one. I

know just where to put it. Tell me, how are you planning to get to the cabin?
You’ll need a car, you know.”

“I’m going to rent one.”
“Take mine.”
“Oh no, Hutch, I couldn’t.”
“Do, please,” Hutch said. “All I do is move it from one side of the street

to the other. Please. You’ll save me a great deal of bother.”

Rosemary smiled. “All right,” she said. “I’ll do you a favor and take

your car.”

Hutch gave her the keys to the car and the cabin, a sketch-map of the

route, and a typed list of instructions concerning the pump, the refrigerator,
and a variety of possible emergencies. Then he put on shoes and a coat and
walked her down to where the car, an old light-blue Oldsmobile, was
parked. “The registration papers are in the glove compartment,” he said.
“Please feel free to stay as long as you like. I have no immediate plans for
either the car or the cabin.”

“I’m sure I won’t stay more than a week,” Rosemary said. “Guy might

not even want me to stay that long.”

When she was settled in the car, Hutch leaned in at the window and

own business if it kills me.”

Rosemary kissed him. “Thank you,” she said. “For that and for this and

for everything.”

On the third day she thought about him. He was vain, self-centered,

shallow, and deceitful. He had married her to have an audience, not a mate.
(Little Miss Just-out-of-Omaha, what a goop she had been! “Oh, I’m used
to actors; I’ve been here almost a year now.” And she had all but followed
him around the studio carrying his newspaper in her mouth.) She would
give him a year to shape up and become a good husband; if he didn’t make
it she would pull out, and with no religious qualms whatever. And
meanwhile she would go back to work and get again that sense of
independence and self-sufficiency she had been so eager to get rid of. She
would be strong and proud and ready to go if he failed to meet her
standards.

Those glutton’s meals—man-size cans of beef stew and chili con carne

—began to disagree with her, and on that third day she was mildly
nauseated and could eat only soup and crackers.

On the fourth day she awoke missing him and cried. What was she

doing there, alone in that cold crummy cabin? What had he done that was
so terrible? He had gotten drunk and had grabbed her without saying may I.
Well that was really an earth-shaking offense, now wasn’t it? There he was,
facing the biggest challenge of his career, and she—instead of being there to
help him, to cue and encourage him—was off in the middle of nowhere,
eating herself sick and feeling sorry for herself. Sure he was vain and self-
centered; he was an actor, wasn’t he? Laurence Olivier was probably vain

and self-centered. And yes he might lie now and then; wasn’t that exactly
what had attracted her and still did?—that freedom and nonchalance so
different from her own boxed-in propriety?

She drove into Brewster and called him. Service answered, the Friendly

One: “Oh hi, dear, are you back from the country? Oh. Guy is out, dear; can
he call you? You’ll call him at five. Right. You’ve certainly got lovely
weather. Are you enjoying yourself? Good.”

At five he was still out, her message waiting for him. She ate in a diner

and went to the one movie theater. At nine he was still out and Service was
someone new and automatic with a message for her: she should call him
before eight the next morning or after six in the evening.

That next day she reached what seemed like a sensible and realistic

view of things. They were both at fault; he for being thoughtless and self-
absorbed, she for failing to express and explain her discontent. He could
hardly be expected to change until she showed him that change was called
for. She had only to talk—no, they had only to talk, for he might be
harboring a similar discontent of which she was similarly unaware—and
matters couldn’t help but improve. Like so many unhappinesses, this one
had begun with silence in the place of honest open talk.

She went into Brewster at six and called and he was there. “Hi, darling,”

he said. “How are you?”

“Fine. How are you?”
“All right. I miss you.”
She smiled at the phone. “I miss you,” she said. “I’m coming home

tomorrow.”

“Good, that’s great,” he said. “All kinds of things have been going on

here. Rehearsals have been postponed until January.”

“Oh?”
“They haven’t been able to cast the little girl. It’s a break for me though;

I’m going to do a pilot next month. A half-hour comedy series.”

“You are?”
“It fell into my lap, Ro. And it really looks good. ABC loves the idea.

It’s called Greenwich Village; it’s going to be filmed there, and I’m a way-
out writer. It’s practically the lead.”

“That’s marvelous, Guy!”
“Allan says I’m suddenly very hot.”

“That’s wonderful!”
“Listen, I’ve got to shower and shave; he’s taking me to a screening that

Stanley Kubrick is going to be at. When are you going to get in?”

“Around noon, maybe earlier.”
“I’ll be waiting. Love you.”
“Love you!”
She called Hutch, who was out, and left word with his service that she

would return the car the following afternoon.

The next morning she cleaned the cabin, closed it up and locked it, and

drove back to the city. Traffic on the Saw Mill River Parkway was
bottlenecked by a three-car collision, and it was close to one o’clock when
she parked the car half-in half-out-of the bus stop in front of the Bramford.
With her small suitcase she hurried into the house.

The elevator man hadn’t taken Guy down, but he had been off duty

from eleven-fifteen to twelve.

He was there, though. The No Strings album was playing. She opened

her mouth to call and he came out of the bedroom in a fresh shirt and tie,
headed for the kitchen with a used coffee cup in his hand.

They kissed, lovingly and fully, he hugging her one-armed because of

the cup.

“Have a good time?” he asked.
“Terrible. Awful. I missed you so.”
“How are you?”
“Fine. How was Stanley Kubrick?”
“Didn’t show, the fink.”
They kissed again.
She brought her suitcase into the bedroom and opened it on the bed. He

came in with two cups of coffee, gave her one, and sat on the vanity bench
while she unpacked. She told him about the yellow-and-orange woods and
the still nights; he told her about Greenwich Village, who else was in it and
who the producers, writers, and director were.

“Are you really fine?” he asked when she was zipping closed the empty

case.

She didn’t understand.
“Your period,” he said. “It was due on Tuesday.”
“It was?”

He nodded.
“Well it’s just two days,” she said—matter-of-factly, as if her heart

weren’t racing, leaping. “It’s probably the change of water, or the food I ate
up there.”

“You’ve never been late before,” he said.
“It’ll probably come tonight. Or tomorrow.”
“You want to bet?”
“Yes.”
“A quarter?”
“Okay.”
“You’re going to lose, Ro.”
“Shut up. You’re getting me all jumpy. It’s only two days. It’ll probably

come tonight.”

CHAPTER 10

Talk with Guy? No, that could wait.
Everything could wait.
She cleaned, shopped, and cooked, breathing carefully. Laura-Louise

came down one morning and asked her to vote for Buckley. She said she
would, to get rid of her.

“Give me my quarter,” Guy said.
“Shut up,” she said, giving his arm a backhand punch.
She made an appointment with an obstetrician and, on Thursday,

October 28th, went to see him. His name was Dr. Hill. He had been
recommended to her by a friend, Elise Dunstan, who had used him through
two pregnancies and swore by him. His office was on West Seventy-second
Street.

He was younger than Rosemary had expected—Guy’s age or even less

—and he looked a little bit like Dr. Kildare on television. She liked him. He
asked her questions slowly and with interest, examined her, and sent her to
a lab on Sixtieth Street where a nurse drew blood from her right arm.

He called the next afternoon at three-thirty.
“Mrs. Woodhouse?”
“Dr. Hill?”
“Yes. Congratulations.”

“Really?”
“Really.”
She sat down on the side of the bed, smiling past the phone. Really,

really, really, really, really.

“Are you there?”
“What happens now?” she asked.
“Very little. You come in and see me again next month. And you get

those Natalin pills and start taking them. One a day. And you fill out some
forms that I’m going to mail you—for the hospital; it’s best to get the
reservation in as soon as possible.”

“When will it be?” she asked.
“If your last period was September twenty-first,” he said, “it works out

to June twenty-eighth.”

“That sounds so far away.”
“It is. Oh, one more thing, Mrs. Woodhouse. The lab would like another

blood sample. Could you drop by there tomorrow or Monday and let them
have it?”

“Yes, of course,” Rosemary said. “What for?”
“The nurse didn’t take as much as she should have.”
“But—I’m pregnant, aren’t I?”
“Yes, they did that test,” Dr. Hill said, “but I generally have them run a

few others besides—blood sugar and so forth—and the nurse didn’t know
and only took enough for the one. It’s nothing to be concerned about.
You’re pregnant. I give you my word.”

“All right,” she said. “I’ll go back tomorrow morning.”
“Do you remember the address?”
“Yes, I still have the card.”
“I’ll put those forms in the mail, and let’s see you again—the last week

in November.”

They made an appointment for November 29th at one o’clock and

Rosemary hung up feeling that something was wrong. The nurse at the lab
had seemed to know exactly what she was doing, and Dr. Hill’s
offhandedness in speaking about her hadn’t quite rung true. Were they
afraid a mistake had been made?—vials of blood mixed up and wrongly
labeled?—and was there still a possibility that she wasn’t pregnant? But

wouldn’t Dr. Hill have told her so frankly and not have been as definite as
he had?

She tried to shake it away. Of course she was pregnant; she had to be,

with her period so long overdue. She went into the kitchen, where a wall
calendar hung, and in the next day’s square wrote Lab; and in the square for
November 29th, Dr. Hill—1:00.

“Isn’t it?” she said.
“Just great. I’m so happy.”
“Father.”
“Mother.”
“Guy, listen,” she said, and looked up at him, suddenly serious. “Let’s

make this a new beginning, okay? A new openness and talking-to-each-
other. Because we haven’t been open. You’ve been so wrapped up in the
show and the pilot and the way things have been breaking for you—I’m not
saying you shouldn’t be; it wouldn’t be normal if you weren’t. But that’s
why I went to the cabin, Guy. To settle in my mind what was going wrong
between us. And that’s what it was, and is: a lack of openness. On my part
too. On my part as much as yours.”

“It’s true,” he said, his hands holding her shoulders, his eyes meeting

hers earnestly. “It’s true. I felt it too. Not as much as you did, I guess. I’m
so God-damned self-centered, Ro. That’s what the whole trouble is. I guess
it’s why I’m in this idiot nutty profession to begin with. You know I love
you though, don’t you? I do, Ro. I’ll try to make it plainer from now on, I
swear to God I will. I’ll be as open as—”

“It’s my fault as much as—”
“Bull. It’s mine. Me and my self-centeredness. Bear with me, will you,

Ro? I’ll try to do better.”

“Oh, Guy,” she said in a tide of remorse and love and forgiveness, and

met his kisses with fervent kisses of her own.

“Fine way for parents to be carrying on,” he said.
She laughed, wet-eyed.
“Gee, honey,” he said, “do you know what I’d love to do?”
“What?”
“Tell Minnie and Roman.” He raised a hand. “I know, I know; we’re

supposed to keep it a deep dark secret. But I told them we were trying and
they were so pleased, and, well, with people that old”—he spread his hands
ruefully—“if we wait too long they might never get to know at all.”

“Tell them,” she said, loving him.
He kissed her nose. “Back in two minutes,” he said, and turned and

hurried to the door. Watching him go, she saw that Minnie and Roman had
become deeply important to him. It wasn’t surprising; his mother was a
busy self-involved chatterer and none of his fathers had been truly fatherly.
The Castevets were filling a need in him, a need of which he himself was
probably unaware. She was grateful to them and would think more kindly
of them in the future.

She went into the bathroom and splashed cold water on her eyes and

fixed her hair and lips. “You’re pregnant,” she told herself in the mirror.
(But the lab wants another blood sample. What for?)

As she came back out they came in at the front door: Minnie in a

housedress, Roman holding in both hands a bottle of wine, and Guy behind
them flushed and smiling. “Now that’s what I call good news!” Minnie said.
“Congrat-u-lations!” She bore down on Rosemary, took her by the
shoulders, and kissed her cheek hard and loud.

“Our best wishes to you, Rosemary,” Roman said, putting his lips to her

other cheek. “We’re more pleased than we can say. We have no champagne
on hand, but this 1961 Saint Julien, I think, will do just as nicely for a
toast.”

Rosemary thanked them.
“When are you due, dear?” Minnie asked.
“June twenty-eighth.”
“It’s going to be so exciting,” Minnie said, “between now and then.”
“We’ll do all your shopping for you,” Roman said.
“Oh, no,” Rosemary said. “Really.”
Guy brought glasses and a corkscrew, and Roman turned with him to

the opening of the wine. Minnie took Rosemary’s elbow and they walked

together into the living room. “Listen, dear,” Minnie said, “do you have a
good doctor?”

“Yes, a very good one,” Rosemary said.
“One of the top obstetricians in New York,” Minnie said, “is a dear

friend of ours. Abe Sapirstein. A Jewish man. He delivers all the Society
babies and he would deliver yours too if we asked him. And he’d do it
cheap, so you’d be saving Guy some of his hard-earned money.”

“Abe Sapirstein?” Roman asked from across the room. “He’s one of the

finest obstetricians in the country, Rosemary. You’ve heard of him, haven’t
you?”

“I think so,” Rosemary said, recalling the name from an article in a

newspaper or magazine.

“I have,” Guy said. “Wasn’t he on Open End a couple of years ago?”
“That’s right,” Roman said. “He’s one of the finest obstetricians in the

country.”

“Ro?” Guy said.
“But what about Dr. Hill?” she asked.
“Don’t worry, I’ll tell him something,” Guy said. “You know me.”
Rosemary thought about Dr. Hill, so young, so Kildare, with his lab that

wanted more blood because the nurse had goofed or the technician had
goofed or someone had goofed, causing her needless bother and concern.

Minnie said, “I’m not going to let you go to no Dr. Hill that nobody

heard of! The best is what you’re going to have, young lady, and the best is
Abe Sapirstein!”

Gratefully Rosemary smiled her decision at them. “If you’re sure he can

take me,” she said. “He might be too busy.”

“He’ll take you,” Minnie said. “I’m going to call him right now.

Where’s the phone?”

“In the bedroom,” Guy said.
Minnie went into the bedroom. Roman poured glasses of wine. “He’s a

brilliant man,” he said, “with all the sensitivity of his much-tormented
race.” He gave glasses to Rosemary and Guy. “Let’s wait for Minnie,” he
said.

They stood motionless, each holding a full wineglass, Roman holding

two. Guy said, “Sit down, honey,” but Rosemary shook her head and stayed
standing.

of ours just found out today that she’s pregnant. Yes, isn’t it? I’m in her
apartment now. We told her you’d be glad to take care of her and that you
wouldn’t charge none of your fancy Society prices neither.” She was silent,
then said “Wait a minute,” and raised her voice. “Rosemary? Can you go
see him tomorrow morning at eleven?”

“Yes, that would be fine,” Rosemary called back.
Roman said, “You see?”
“Eleven’s fine, Abe,” Minnie said. “Yes. You too. No, not at all. Let’s

hope so. Good-by.”

She came back. “There you are,” she said. “I’ll write down his address

for you before we go. He’s on Seventy-ninth Street and Park Avenue.”

“Thanks a million, Minnie,” Guy said, and Rosemary said, “I don’t

know how to thank you. Both of you.”

Minnie took the glass of wine Roman held out to her. “It’s easy,” she

said. “Just do everything Abe tells you and have a fine healthy baby; that’s
all the thanks we’ll ever ask for.”

Roman raised his glass. “To a fine healthy baby,” he said.
“Hear, hear,” Guy said, and they all drank; Guy, Minnie, Rosemary,

Roman.

“Mmm,” Guy said. “Delicious.”
“Isn’t it?” Roman said. “And not at all expensive.”
“Oh my,” Minnie said, “I can’t wait to tell the news to Laura-Louise.”
Rosemary said, “Oh, please. Don’t tell anyone else. Not yet. It’s so

early.”

“She’s right,” Roman said. “There’ll be plenty of time later on for

spreading the good tidings.”

“Would anyone like some cheese and crackers?” Rosemary asked.
“Sit down, honey,” Guy said. “I’ll get it.”

discussion with Guy.) What was Andrew-or-Susan now, a pinpoint speck?
No, surely it was more than that; after all, wasn’t she in her second month
already? Indeed she was. It had probably reached the early tadpole stage.
She would have to find a chart or book that told month by month exactly
what was happening. Dr. Sapirstein would know of one.

A fire engine screamed by. Guy shifted and mumbled, and behind the

wall Minnie and Roman’s bed creaked.

There were so many dangers to worry about in the months ahead; fires,

falling objects, cars out of control; dangers that had never been dangers
before but were dangers now, now that Andrew-or-Susan was begun and
living. (Yes, living!) She would give up her occasional cigarette, of course.
And check with Dr. Sapirstein about cocktails.

If only prayer were still possible! How nice it would be to hold a

crucifix again and have God’s ear: ask Him for safe passage through the
eight more months ahead; no German measles, please, no great new drugs
with Thalidomide side effects. Eight good months, please, free of accident
and illness, full of iron and milk and sunshine.

Suddenly she remembered the good luck charm, the ball of tannis root;

and foolish or not, wanted it—no, needed it—around her neck. She slipped
out of bed, tiptoed to the vanity, and got it from the Louis Sherry box, freed
it from its aluminum-foil wrapping. The smell of the tannis root had
changed; it was still strong but no longer repellent. She put the chain over
her head.

With the ball tickling between her breasts, she tiptoed back to bed and

climbed in. She drew up the blanket and, closing her eyes, settled her head
down into the pillow. She lay breathing deeply and was soon asleep, her
hands on her stomach shielding the embryo inside her.

PART 2

Dr. Sapirstein was wonderful; a tall sunburned man with white hair and

a shaggy white moustache (she had seen him somewhere before but
couldn’t think where; maybe on Open End) who despite the Miës van der
Rohe chairs and cool marble tables of his waiting room was reassuringly
old-fashioned and direct. “Please don’t read books,” he said. “Every
pregnancy is different, and a book that tells you what you’re going to feel in
the third week of the third month is only going to make you worry. No
pregnancy was ever exactly like the ones described in the books. And don’t
listen to your friends either. They’ll have had experiences very different
from yours and they’ll be absolutely certain that their pregnancies were the
normal ones and that yours is abnormal.”

She asked him about the vitamin pills Dr. Hill had prescribed.
“No, no pills,” he said. “Minnie Castevet has a herbarium and a blender;

I’m going to have her make a daily drink for you that will be fresher, safer,
and more vitamin-rich than any pill on the market. And another thing: don’t
be afraid to satisfy your cravings. The theory today is that pregnant women

invent cravings because they feel it’s expected of them. I don’t hold with
that. I say if you want pickles in the middle of the night, make your poor
husband go out and get some, just like in the old jokes. Whatever you want,
be sure you get it. You’ll be surprised at some of the strange things your
body will ask for in these next few months. And any questions you have,
call me night or day. Call me, not your mother or your Aunt Fanny. That’s
what I’m here for.”

She was to come in once a week, which was certainly closer attention

than Dr. Hill gave his patients, and he would make a reservation at Doctors
Hospital without any bother of filling out forms.

Everything was right and bright and lovely. She got a Vidal Sassoon

haircut, finished with the dentist, voted on Election Day (for Lindsay for
mayor), and went down to Greenwich Village to watch some of the outdoor
shooting of Guy’s pilot. Between takes—Guy running with a stolen hot-dog
wagon down Sullivan Street—she crouched on her heels to talk to small
children and smiled Me too at pregnant women.

She didn’t have any cravings though. Her appetite, in fact, seemed

smaller than usual. Coffee and toast was enough for breakfast, a vegetable
and a small piece of rare meat for dinner. Each morning at eleven Minnie
brought over what looked like a watery pistachio milkshake. It was cold and
sour.

“What’s in it?” Rosemary asked.
“Snips and snails and puppy-dogs’ tails,” Minnie said, smiling.
Rosemary laughed. “That’s fine,” she said, “but what if we want a girl?”
“Do you?”
“Well of course we’ll take what we get, but it would be nice if the first

one were a boy.”

“Well there you are,” Minnie said.
Finished drinking, Rosemary said, “No, really, what’s in it?”

“A raw egg, gelatin, herbs…”
“Tannis root?”
“Some of that, some of some other things.”
Minnie brought the drink every day in the same glass, a large one with

blue and green stripes, and stood waiting while Rosemary drained it.

It turned out to be just as well though, for Rosemary began to develop

abdominal pains of an alarming sharpness. She called Dr. Sapirstein and he
asked her to come in. Examining her, he said that there was nothing to
worry about; the pains came from an entirely normal expansion of her
pelvis. They would disappear in a day or two, and meanwhile she could
fight them with ordinary doses of aspirin.

Rosemary, relieved, said, “I was afraid it might be an ectopic

pregnancy.”

“Ectopic?” Dr. Sapirstein asked, and looked skeptically at her. She

colored. He said, “I thought you weren’t going to read books, Rosemary.”

“It was staring me right in the face at the drug store,” she said.
“And all it did was worry you. Will you go home and throw it away,

please?”

“I will. I promise.”
“The pains will be gone in two days,” he said. “‘Ectopic pregnancy.’”

He shook his head.

But the pains weren’t gone in two days; they were worse, and grew

worse still, as if something inside her were encircled by a wire being drawn

tighter and tighter to cut it in two. There would be pain for hour after hour,
and then a few minutes of relative painlessness that was only the pain
gathering itself for a new assault. Aspirin did little good, and she was afraid
of taking too many. Sleep, when it finally came, brought harried dreams in
which she fought against huge spiders that had cornered her in the
bathroom, or tugged desperately at a small black bush that had taken root in
the middle of the living room rug. She woke tired, to even sharper pain.

“This happens sometimes,” Dr. Sapirstein said. “It’ll stop any day now.

Are you sure you haven’t been lying about your age? Usually it’s the older
women with less flexible joints who have this sort of difficulty.”

Minnie, bringing in the drink, said, “You poor thing. Don’t fret, dear; a

niece of mine in Toledo had exactly the same kind of pains and so did two
other women I know of. And their deliveries were real easy and they had
beautiful healthy babies.”

“Thanks,” Rosemary said.
Minnie drew back righteously. “What do you mean? That’s the gospel

truth! I swear to God it is, Rosemary!”

Her face grew pinched and wan and shadowed; she looked awful. But

Guy insisted otherwise. “What are you talking about?” he said. “You look
great. It’s that haircut that looks awful, if you want the truth, honey. That’s
the biggest mistake you ever made in your whole life.”

He had stopped studying with Dominick, his vocal coach, and no longer
spent afternoons auditioning and being seen. He had two good commercials
on deck—for Pall Mall and Texaco—and rehearsals of Don’t I Know You
From Somewhere? were definitely scheduled to begin in mid-January. He
gave Rosemary a hand with the cleaning, and they played time-limit
Scrabble for a dollar a game. He answered the phone and, when it was for
Rosemary, made plausible excuses.

She had planned to give a Thanksgiving dinner for some of their friends

who, like themselves, had no family nearby; with the constant pain, though,
and the constant worry over Andrew-or-Melinda’s well-being, she decided
not to, and they ended up going to Minnie and Roman’s instead.

“I don’t think so, Hutch,” Rosemary said. “I haven’t been feeling too

well lately. And Guy’s got two commercials this week.”

“What’s the matter with you?”
“Nothing, really. I’ve just been a bit under the weather.”
“May I come up for a few minutes?”
“Oh do; I’d love to see you.”
She hurried into slacks and a jersey top, put on lipstick and brushed her

hair. The pain sharpened—locking her for a moment with shut eyes and
clenched teeth—and then it sank back to its usual level and she breathed out
gratefully and went on brushing.

Hutch, when he saw her, stared and said, “My God.”
“It’s Vidal Sassoon and it’s very in,” she said.
“What’s wrong with you?” he said. “I don’t mean your hair.”
“Do I look that bad?” She took his coat and hat and hung them away,

smiling a fixed bright smile.

“You look terrible,” Hutch said. “You’ve lost God-knows-how-many

pounds and you have circles around your eyes that a panda would envy.
You aren’t on one of those ‘Zen diets,’ are you?”

“No.”

“Then what is it? Have you seen a doctor?”
“I suppose I might as well tell you,” Rosemary said. “I’m pregnant. I’m

in my third month.”

Hutch looked at her, nonplussed. “That’s ridiculous,” he said. “Pregnant

women gain weight, they don’t lose it. And they look healthy, not—”

“There’s a slight complication,” Rosemary said, leading the way into

the living room. “I have stiff joints or something, so I have pains that keep
me awake most of the night. Well, one pain, really; it just sort of continues.
It’s not serious, though. It’ll probably stop any day now.”

“I never heard of ‘stiff joints’ being a problem,” Hutch said.
“Stiff pelvic joints. It’s fairly common.”
Hutch sat in Guy’s easy chair. “Well, congratulations,” he said

doubtfully. “You must be very happy.”

“I am,” Rosemary said. “We both are.”
“Who’s your obstetrician?”
“His name is Abraham Sapirstein. He’s—”
“I know him,” Hutch said. “Or of him. He delivered two of Doris’s

babies.” Doris was Hutch’s elder daughter.

“He’s one of the best in the city,” Rosemary said.
“When did you see him last?”
“The day before yesterday. And he said just what I told you; it’s fairly

common and it’ll probably stop any day now. Of course he’s been saying
that since it started…”

“How much weight have you lost?”
“Only three pounds. It looks—”
“Nonsense! You’ve lost far more than that!”
Rosemary smiled. “You sound like our bathroom scale,” she said. “Guy

finally threw it out, it was scaring me so. No, I’ve lost only three pounds
and one little space more. And it’s perfectly normal to lose a little during
the first few months. Later on I’ll be gaining.”

“I certainly hope so,” Hutch said. “You look as if you’re being drained

by a vampire. Are you sure there aren’t any puncture marks?” Rosemary
smiled. “Well,” Hutch said, leaning back and smiling too, “we’ll assume
that Dr. Sapirstein knows whereof he speaks. God knows he should; he
charges enough. Guy must be doing sensationally.”

the Castevets are close friends of his; they sent me to him and he’s charging
us his special non-Society prices.”

“Does that mean Doris and Axel are Society?” Hutch said. “They’ll be

delighted to hear about it.”

The doorbell rang. Hutch offered to answer it but Rosemary wouldn’t

let him. “Hurts less when I move around,” she said, going out of the room;
and went to the front door trying to recall if there was anything she had
ordered that hadn’t been delivered yet.

It was Roman, looking slightly winded. Rosemary smiled and said, “I

mentioned your name two seconds ago.”

“In a favorable context, I hope,” he said. “Do you need anything from

outside? Minnie is going down in a while and our house phone doesn’t
seem to be functioning.”

“No, nothing,” Rosemary said. “Thanks so much for asking. I phoned

out for things this morning.”

Roman glanced beyond her for an instant, and then, smiling, asked if

Guy was home already.

“No, he won’t be back until six at the earliest,” Rosemary said; and,

because Roman’s pallid face stayed waiting with its questioning smile,
added, “A friend of ours is here.” The questioning smile stayed. She said,
“Would you like to meet him?”

“Yes, I would,” Roman said. “If I won’t be intruding.”
“Of course you won’t.” Rosemary showed him in. He was wearing a

black-and-white checked jacket over a blue shirt and a wide paisley tie. He
passed close to her and she noticed for the first time that his ears were
pierced—that the left one was, at any rate.

She followed him to the living-room archway. “This is Edward

Hutchins,” she said, and to Hutch, who was rising and smiling, “This is
Roman Castevet, the neighbor I just mentioned.” She explained to Roman:
“I was telling Hutch that it was you and Minnie who sent me to Dr.
Sapirstein.”

The two men shook hands and greeted each other. Hutch said, “One of

my daughters used Dr. Sapirstein too. On two occasions.”

“He’s a brilliant man,” Roman said. “We met him only last spring but

he’s become one of our closest friends.”

Rosemary sat by Hutch.

Roman said, “So Rosemary has told you the good news, has she?”
“Yes, she has,” Hutch said.
“We must see that she gets plenty of rest,” Roman said, “and complete

freedom from worry and anxiety.”

Rosemary said, “That would be heaven.”
“I was a bit alarmed by her appearance,” Hutch said, looking at

Rosemary as he took out a pipe and a striped rep tobacco pouch.

“Were you?” Roman said.
“But now that I know she’s in Dr. Sapirstein’s care I feel considerably

relieved.”

“She’s only lost two or three pounds,” Roman said. “Isn’t that so,

Rosemary?”

“That’s right,” Rosemary said.
“And that’s quite normal in the early months of pregnancy,” Roman

said. “Later on she’ll gain—probably far too much.”

“So I gather,” Hutch said, filling his pipe.
Rosemary said, “Mrs. Castevet makes a vitamin drink for me every day,

with a raw egg and milk and fresh herbs that she grows.”

“All according to Dr. Sapirstein’s directions, of course,” Roman said.

“He’s inclined to be suspicious of commercially prepared vitamin pills.”

“Is he really?” Hutch asked, pocketing his pouch. “I can’t think of

anything I’d be less suspicious of; they’re surely manufactured under every
imaginable safeguard.” He struck two matches as one and sucked flame into
his pipe, blowing out puffs of aromatic white smoke. Rosemary put an
ashtray near him.

“That’s true,” Roman said, “but commercial pills can sit for months in a

warehouse or on a druggist’s shelf and lose a great deal of their original
potency.”

“Yes, I hadn’t thought of that,” Hutch said; “I suppose they can.”
Rosemary said, “I like the idea of having everything fresh and natural.

I’ll bet expectant mothers chewed bits of tannis root hundreds and hundreds
of years ago when nobody’d even heard of vitamins.”

“Tannis root?” Hutch said.

“It’s one of the herbs in the drink,” Rosemary said. “Or is it an herb?”

She looked to Roman. “Can a root be an herb?” But Roman was watching
Hutch and didn’t hear.

“‘Tannis?’” Hutch said. “I’ve never heard of it. Are you sure you don’t

mean ‘anise’ or ‘orris root’?”

Roman said, “Tannis.”
“Here,” Rosemary said, drawing out her charm. “It’s good luck too,

theoretically. Brace yourself; the smell takes a little getting-used-to.” She
held the charm out, leaning forward to bring it closer to Hutch.

He sniffed at it and drew away, grimacing. “I should say it does,” he

said. He took the chained ball between two fingertips and squinted at it
from a distance. “It doesn’t look like root matter at all,” he said; “it looks
like mold or fungus of some kind.” He looked at Roman. “Is it ever called
by another name?” he asked.

“Not to my knowledge,” Roman said.
“I shall look it up in the encyclopedia and find out all about it,” Hutch

said. “Tannis. What a pretty holder or charm or whatever-it-is. Where did
you get it?”

With a quick smile at Roman, Rosemary said, “The Castevets gave it to

me.” She tucked the charm back inside her top.

Hutch said to Roman, “You and your wife seem to be taking better care

of Rosemary than her own parents would.”

Roman said, “We’re very fond of her, and of Guy too.” He pushed

against the arms of his chair and raised himself to his feet. “If you’ll excuse
me, I have to go now,” he said. “My wife is waiting for me.”

“Of course,” Hutch said, rising. “It’s a pleasure to have met you.”
“We’ll meet again, I’m sure,” Roman said. “Don’t bother, Rosemary.”
“It’s no bother.” She walked along with him to the front door. His right

ear was pierced too, she saw, and there were many small scars on his neck
like a flight of distant birds. “Thanks again for stopping by,” she said.

“Don’t mention it,” Roman said. “I like your friend Mr. Hutchins; he

seems extremely intelligent.”

Rosemary, opening the door, said, “He is.”
“I’m glad I met him,” Roman said. With a smile and a hand-wave he

started down the hall.

“’By,” Rosemary said, waving back.

“Thanks,” Rosemary said. “I was until my pelvis intervened. Roman

has pierced ears. I just noticed it for the first time.”

“Pierced ears and piercing eyes,” Hutch said. “What was he before he

became a Golden Ager?”

“Just about everything. And he’s been everywhere in the world. Really

everywhere.”

“Nonsense; nobody has. Why did he ring your bell?—if I’m not being

too inquisitive.”

“To see if I needed anything from outside. The house phone isn’t

working. They’re fantastic neighbors. They’d come in and do the cleaning
if I let them.”

“What’s she like?”
Rosemary told him. “Guy’s gotten very close to them,” she said. “I

think they’ve become sort of parent-figures for him.”

“And you?”
“I’m not sure. Sometimes I’m so grateful I could kiss them, and

sometimes I get a sort of smothery feeling, as if they’re being too friendly
and helpful. Yet how can I complain? You remember the power failure?”

“Shall I ever forget it? I was in an elevator.”
“No.”
“Yes indeed. Five hours in total darkness with three women and a John

Bircher who were all sure that the Bomb had fallen.”

“How awful.”
“You were saying?”
“We were here, Guy and I, and two minutes after the lights went out

Minnie was at the door with a handful of candles.” She gestured toward the
mantel. “Now how can you find fault with neighbors like that?”

“You can’t, obviously,” Hutch said, and stood looking at the mantel.

“Are those the ones?” he asked. Two pewter candlesticks stood between a
bowl of polished stones and a brass microscope; in them were three-inch
lengths of black candle ribbed with drippings.

worth. What is it?”

“Were they all black?” he asked.
“Yes,” she said. “Why?”
“Just curious.” He turned from the mantel, smiling at her. “Offer me

coffee, will you? And tell me more about Mrs. Castevet. Where does she
grow those herbs of hers? In window boxes?”

“You’re the surprise,” Rosemary said. “What happened?”
“Ah, they stopped in the middle for a rewrite, the dumb bastards. We

start again in the morning. Stay where you are, nobody move; I’ll just get
rid of my coat.” He went out to the closet.

“Would you like some coffee?” Rosemary called.
“Love some!”
She got up and poured a cup, and refilled Hutch’s cup and her own.

Hutch sucked at his pipe, looking thoughtfully before him.

Guy came back in with his hands full of packs of Pall Mall. “Loot,” he

said, dumping them on the table. “Hutch?”

“No, thanks.”
Guy tore a pack open, jammed cigarettes up, and pulled one out. He

winked at Rosemary as she sat down again.

Hutch said, “It seems congratulations are in order.”
Guy, lighting up, said, “Rosemary told you? It’s wonderful, isn’t it?

We’re delighted. Of course I’m scared stiff that I’ll be a lousy father, but
Rosemary’ll be such a great mother that it won’t make much difference.”

“When is the baby due?” Hutch asked.

of Hutch’s grandchildren.

Hutch said, “I met your neighbor, Roman Castevet.”
“Oh, did you?” Guy said. “Funny old duck, isn’t he? He’s got some

interesting stories, though, about Otis Skinner and Modjeska. He’s quite a
theater buff.”

Rosemary said, “Did you ever notice that his ears are pierced?”
“You’re kidding,” Guy said.
“No I’m not; I saw.”
They drank their coffee, talking of Guy’s quickening career and of a trip

Hutch planned to make in the spring to Greece and Turkey.

“It’s a shame we haven’t seen more of you lately,” Guy said, when

Hutch had excused himself and risen. “With me so busy and Ro being the
way she is, we really haven’t seen anyone.”

“Perhaps we can have dinner together soon,” Hutch said; and Guy,

agreeing, went to get his coat.

Rosemary said, “Don’t forget to look up tannis root.”
“I won’t,” Hutch said. “And you tell Dr. Sapirstein to check his scale; I

still think you’ve lost more than three pounds.”

“Don’t be silly,” Rosemary said. “Doctors’ scales aren’t wrong.”
Guy, holding open a coat, said, “It’s not mine, it must be yours.”
“Right you are,” Hutch said. Turning, he put his arms back into it.

“Have you thought about names yet,” he asked Rosemary, “or is it too
soon?”

“Andrew or Douglas if it’s a boy,” she said. “Melinda or Sarah if it’s a

girl.”

hat.

Rosemary offered her cheek for Hutch’s kiss.
“I do hope the pain stops soon,” he said.
“It will,” she said, smiling. “Don’t worry.”
Guy said, “It’s a pretty common condition.”
Hutch felt his pockets. “Is there another one of these around?” he asked,

and showed them a brown fur-lined glove and felt his pockets again.

Rosemary looked around at the floor and Guy went to the closet and

said.

“Nuisance,” Hutch said. “I probably left it at City Center. I’ll stop back

there. Let’s really have that dinner, shall we?”

“Definitely,” Guy said, and Rosemary said, “Next week.”
They watched him around the first turn of the hallway and then stepped

back inside and closed the door.

“That was a nice surprise,” Guy said. “Was he here long?”
“Not very,” Rosemary said. “Guess what he said.”
“What?”
“I look terrible.”
“Good old Hutch,” Guy said, “spreading cheer wherever he goes.”

Rosemary looked at him questioningly. “Well he is a professional crepe-
hanger, honey,” he said. “Remember how he tried to sour us on moving in
here?”

“He isn’t a professional crepe-hanger,” Rosemary said, going into the

kitchen to clear the table.

Guy leaned against the door jamb. “Then he sure is one of the top-

ranking amateurs,” he said.

A few minutes later he put his coat on and went out for a newspaper.

Rosemary picked up the receiver. “Hutch?” she said.
“Hello, Rosemary,” Hutch said. “Tell me, dear, do you go out at all or

do you stay in your apartment all day?”

“Well I haven’t been going out,” she said, looking at Guy; “but I could.

Why?” Guy looked back at her, frowning, listening.

“There’s something I want to speak to you about,” Hutch said. “Can you

meet me tomorrow morning at eleven in front of the Seagram Building?”

“Yes, if you want me to,” she said. “What is it? Can’t you tell me now?”

“I’d rather not,” he said. “It’s nothing terribly important so don’t brood

about it. We can have a late brunch or early lunch if you’d like.”

“That would be nice.”
“Good. Eleven o’clock then, in front of the Seagram Building.”
“Right. Did you get your glove?”
“No, they didn’t have it,” he said, “but it’s time I got some new ones

anyway. Good night, Rosemary. Sleep well.”

“You too. Good night.”
She hung up.
“What was that?” Guy asked.
“He wants me to meet him tomorrow morning. He has something he

wants to talk to me about.”

“And he didn’t say what?”
“Not a word.”
Guy shook his head, smiling. “I think those boys’ adventure stories are

going to his head,” he said. “Where are you meeting him?”

“In front of the Seagram Building at eleven o’clock.”
Guy unplugged the phone and went out with it to the den; almost

immediately, though, he was back. “You’re the pregnant one and I’m the
one with yens,” he said, plugging the phone back in and putting it on the
night table. “I’m going to go out and get an ice cream cone. Do you want
one?”

“Okay,” Rosemary said.
“Vanilla?”
“Fine.”
“I’ll be as quick as I can.”
He went out, and Rosemary leaned back against her pillows, looking

ahead at nothing with her book forgotten in her lap. What was it Hutch
wanted to talk about? Nothing terribly important, he had said. But it must
be something not unimportant too, or else he wouldn’t have summoned her
as he had. Was it something about Joan?—or one of the other girls who had
shared the apartment?

Far away she heard the Castevets’ doorbell give one short ring.

Probably it was Guy, asking them if they wanted ice cream or a morning
paper. Nice of him.

The pain sharpened inside her.

“Why, that’s fine, dear,” Minnie said. “Don’t you worry about a thing.

You don’t have to take it at no fixed time; just so you take it sometime,
that’s all. You go on out. It’s a nice day and it’ll do you good to get some
fresh air. Buzz me when you get back and I’ll bring the drink in then.”

It was indeed a nice day; sunny, cold, clear, and invigorating. Rosemary

walked through it slowly, ready to smile, as if she weren’t carrying her pain
inside her. Salvation Army Santa Clauses were on every corner, shaking
their bells in their fool-nobody costumes. Stores all had their Christmas
windows; Park Avenue had its center line of trees.

She reached the Seagram Building at a quarter of eleven and, because

she was early and there was no sign yet of Hutch, sat for a while on the low
wall at the side of the building’s forecourt, taking the sun on her face and
listening with pleasure to busy footsteps and snatches of conversation, to
cars and trucks and a helicopter’s racketing. The dress beneath her coat was
—for the first satisfying time—snug over her stomach; maybe after lunch
she would go to Bloomingdale’s and look at maternity dresses. She was
glad Hutch had called her out this way (but what did he want to talk
about?); pain, even constant pain, was no excuse for staying indoors as
much as she had. She would fight it from now on, fight it with air and
sunlight and activity, not succumb to it in Bramford gloom under the well-

meant pamperings of Minnie and Guy and Roman. Pain, begone! she
thought; I will have no more of thee! The pain stayed, immune to Positive
Thinking.

At five of eleven she went and stood by the building’s glass doors, at

the edge of their heavy flow of traffic. Hutch would probably be coming
from inside, she thought, from an earlier appointment; or else why had he
chosen here rather than someplace else for their meeting? She scouted the
outcoming faces as best she could, saw him but was mistaken, then saw a
man she had dated before she met Guy and was mistaken again. She kept
looking, stretching now and then on tiptoes; not anxiously, for she knew
that even if she failed to see him, Hutch would see her.

He hadn’t come by five after eleven, nor by ten after. At a quarter after

she went inside to look at the building’s directory, thinking she might see a
name there that he had mentioned at one time or another and to which she
might make a call of inquiry. The directory proved to be far too large and
many-named for careful reading, though; she skimmed over its crowded
columns and, seeing nothing familiar, went outside again.

She went back to the low wall and sat where she had sat before, this

time watching the front of the building and glancing over occasionally at
the shallow steps leading up from the sidewalk. Men and women met other
men and women, but there was no sign of Hutch, who was rarely if ever late
for appointments.

At eleven-forty Rosemary went back into the building and was sent by a

maintenance man down to the basement, where at the end of a white
institutional corridor there was a pleasant lounge area with black modern
chairs, an abstract mural, and a single stainless-steel phone booth. A Negro
girl was in the booth, but she finished soon and came out with a friendly
smile. Rosemary slipped in and dialed the number at the apartment. After
five rings Service answered; there were no messages for Rosemary, and the
one message for Guy was from a Rudy Horn, not a Mr. Hutchins. She had
another dime and used it to call Hutch’s number, thinking that his service
might know where he was or have a message from him. On the first ring a
woman answered with a worried non-service “Yes?”

“Is this Edward Hutchins’ apartment?” Rosemary asked.
“Yes. Who is this, please?” She sounded like a woman neither young

nor old—in her forties, perhaps.

Rosemary said, “My name is Rosemary Woodhouse. I had an eleven

o’clock appointment with Mr. Hutchins and he hasn’t shown up yet. Do you
have any idea whether he’s coming or not?”

There was silence, and more of it. “Hello?” Rosemary said.
“Hutch has told me about you, Rosemary,” the woman said. “My name

is Grace Cardiff. I’m a friend of his. He was taken ill last night. Or early
this morning, to be exact.”

Rosemary’s heart dropped. “Taken ill?” she said.
“Yes. He’s in a deep coma. The doctors haven’t been able to find out yet

what’s causing it. He’s at St. Vincent’s Hospital.”

“Oh, that’s awful,” Rosemary said. “I spoke to him last night around

ten-thirty and he sounded fine.”

“I spoke to him not much later than that,” Grace Cardiff said, “and he

sounded fine to me too. But his cleaning woman came in this morning and
found him unconscious on the bedroom floor.”

“And they don’t know what from?”
“Not yet. It’s early though, and I’m sure they’ll find out soon. And

when they do, they’ll be able to treat him. At the moment he’s totally
unresponsive.”

“How awful,” Rosemary said. “And he’s never had anything like this

before?”

“Never,” Grace Cardiff said. “I’m going back to the hospital now, and if

you’ll give me a number where I can reach you, I’ll let you know when
there’s any change.”

“Oh, thank you,” Rosemary said. She gave the apartment number and

then asked if there was anything she could do to help.

“Not really,” Grace Cardiff said. “I just finished calling his daughters,

and that seems to be the sum total of what has to be done, at least until he
comes to. If there should be anything else I’ll let you know.”

would ever again have anyone on whom she could so effortlessly and
completely depend. She wondered too about Grace Cardiff, who sounded
silver-gray and attractive; had she and Hutch been having a quiet middle-
aged affair? She hoped so. Maybe this brush with death—that’s what it
would be, a brush with death, not death itself; it couldn’t be—maybe this
brush with death would nudge them both toward marriage, and turn out in
the end to have been a disguised blessing. Maybe. Maybe.

She crossed Madison, and somewhere between Madison and Fifth

found herself looking into a window in which a small crèche was
spotlighted, with exquisite porcelain figures of Mary and the Infant and
Joseph, the Magi and the shepherds and the animals of the stable. She
smiled at the tender scene, laden with meaning and emotion that survived
her agnosticism; and then saw in the window glass, like a veil hung before
the Nativity, her own reflection smiling, with the skeletal cheeks and black-
circled eyes that yesterday had alarmed Hutch and now alarmed her.

“Well this is what I call the long arm of coincidence!” Minnie

exclaimed, and came smiling to her when Rosemary turned, in a white
mock-leather coat and a red hat and her neckchained eyeglasses. “I said to
myself, ‘As long as Rosemary’s out, I might as well go out, and do the last
little bit of my Christmas shopping.’ And here you are and here I am! It
looks like we’re just two of a kind that go the same places and do the same
things! Why, what’s the matter, dear? You look so sad and downcast.”

“I just heard some bad news,” Rosemary said. “A friend of mine is very

sick. In the hospital.”

“Oh, no,” Minnie said. “Who?”
“His name is Edward Hutchins,” Rosemary said.
“The one Roman met yesterday afternoon? Why, he was going on for an

hour about what a nice intelligent man he was! Isn’t that a pity! What’s
troubling him?”

Rosemary told her.
“My land,” Minnie said, “I hope it doesn’t turn out the way it did for

poor Lily Gardenia! And the doctors don’t even know? Well at least they
admit it; usually they cover up what they don’t know with a lot of high-
flown Latin. If the money spent putting those astronauts up where they are
was spent on medical research down here, we’d all be a lot better off, if you
want my opinion. Do you feel all right, Rosemary?”

“The pain is a little worse,” Rosemary said.
“You poor thing. You know what I think? I think we ought to be going

home now. What do you say?”

“No, no, you have to finish your Christmas shopping.”
“Oh shoot,” Minnie said, “there’s two whole weeks yet. Hold onto your

ears.” She put her wrist to her mouth and blew stabbing shrillness from a
whistle on a gold-chain bracelet. A taxi veered toward them. “How’s that
for service?” she said. “A nice big Checker one too.”

Soon after, Rosemary was in the apartment again. She drank the cold

sour drink from the blue-and-green-striped glass while Minnie looked on
approvingly.

The weeks before the holidays and the holiday season itself were

dismal. The pain grew worse, grew so grinding that something shut down in
Rosemary—some center of resistance and remembered well-being—and
she stopped reacting, stopped mentioning pain to Dr. Sapirstein, stopped
referring to pain even in her thoughts. Until now it had been inside her; now
she was inside it; pain was the weather around her, was time, was the entire
world. Numbed and exhausted, she began to sleep more, and to eat more
too—more nearly raw meat.

She did what had to be done: cooked and cleaned, sent Christmas cards

to the family—she hadn’t the heart for phone calls—and put new money
into envelopes for the elevator men, doormen, porters, and Mr. Micklas.
She looked at newspapers and tried to be interested in students burning
draft cards and the threat of a city-wide transit strike, but she couldn’t: this
was news from a world of fantasy; nothing was real but her world of pain.
Guy bought Christmas presents for Minnie and Roman; for each other they
agreed to buy nothing at all. Minnie and Roman gave them coasters.

They went to nearby movies a few times, but most evenings they stayed

in or went around the hall to Minnie and Roman’s, where they met couples
named Fountain and Gilmore and Wees, a woman named Mrs. Sabatini who
always brought her cat, and Dr. Shand, the retired dentist who had made the

chain for Rosemary’s tannis-charm. These were all elderly people who
treated Rosemary with kindness and concern, seeing, apparently, that she
was less than well. Laura-Louise was there too, and sometimes Dr.
Sapirstein joined the group. Roman was an energetic host, filling glasses
and launching new topics of conversation. On New Year’s Eve he proposed
a toast—“To 1966, The Year One”—that puzzled Rosemary, although
everyone else seemed to understand and approve of it. She felt as if she had
missed a literary or political reference—not that she really cared. She and
Guy usually left early, and Guy would see her into bed and go back. He was
the favorite of the women, who gathered around him and laughed at his
jokes.

Hutch stayed as he was, in his deep and baffling coma. Grace Cardiff

called every week or so. “No change, no change at all,” she would say.
“They still don’t know. He could wake up tomorrow morning or he could
sink deeper and never wake up at all.”

bed and look down powerlessly at the closed eyes, the scarcely discernible
breathing. The second time, early in January, his daughter Doris was there,
sitting by the window working a piece of needlepoint. Rosemary had met
her a year earlier at Hutch’s apartment; she was a short pleasant woman in
her thirties, married to a Swedishborn psychoanalyst. She looked,
unfortunately, like a younger wigged Hutch.

Doris didn’t recognize Rosemary, and when Rosemary had re-

introduced herself she made a distressed apology.

“Please don’t,” Rosemary said, smiling. “I know. I look awful.”
“No, you haven’t changed at all,” Doris said. “I’m terrible with faces. I

forget my children, really I do.”

She put aside her needlepoint and Rosemary drew up another chair and

sat with her. They talked about Hutch’s condition and watched a nurse come
in and replace the hanging bottle that fed into his taped arm.

“We have an obstetrician in common,” Rosemary said when the nurse

had gone; and then they talked about Rosemary’s pregnancy and Dr.
Sapirstein’s skill and eminence. Doris was surprised to hear that he was
seeing Rosemary every week. “He only saw me once a month,” she said.
“Till near the end, of course. Then it was every two weeks, and then every
week, but only in the last month. I thought that was fairly standard.”

Rosemary could find nothing to say, and Doris suddenly looked

distressed again. “But I suppose every pregnancy is a law unto itself,” she
said, with a smile meant to rectify tactlessness.

“That’s what he told me,” Rosemary said.
That evening she told Guy that Dr. Sapirstein had only seen Doris once

a month. “Something is wrong with me,” she said. “And he knew it right
from the beginning.”

“Don’t be silly,” Guy said. “He would tell you. And even if he

wouldn’t, he would certainly tell me.”

“Has he? Has he said anything to you?”
“Absolutely not, Ro. I swear to God.”
“Then why do I have to go every week?”
“Maybe that’s the way he does it now. Or maybe he’s giving you better

treatment, because you’re Minnie and Roman’s friend.”

“No.”
“Well I don’t know; ask him,” Guy said. “Maybe you’re more fun to

examine than she was.”

“Yes, but—”
“And the treatment has to be different too. Doris Allert had had two

deliveries before she ever came to me, and there had been no complications
whatever. She didn’t require the close attention a first-timer does.”

“Do you always see first-timers every week?”
“I try to,” he said. “Sometimes I can’t. There’s nothing wrong with you,

Rosemary. The pain will stop very soon.”

“I’ve been eating raw meat,” she said. “Just warmed a little.”
“Anything else out of the ordinary?”
“No,” she said, taken aback; wasn’t that enough?
“Whatever you want, eat it,” he said. “I told you you’d get some strange

cravings. I’ve had women eat paper. And stop worrying. I don’t keep things

from my patients; it makes life too confusing. I’m telling you the truth.
Okay?”

She nodded.
“Say hello to Minnie and Roman for me,” he said. “And Guy too.”

Not long after telling Dr. Sapirstein about the nearly raw meat,

Rosemary found herself chewing on a raw and dripping chicken heart—in
the kitchen one morning at four-fifteen. She looked at herself in the side of
the toaster, where her moving reflection had caught her eye, and then
looked at her hand, at the part of the heart she hadn’t yet eaten held in red-
dripping fingers. After a moment she went over and put the heart in the
garbage, and turned on the water and rinsed her hand. Then, with the water
still running, she bent over the sink and began to vomit.

When she was finished she drank some water, washed her face and

hands, and cleaned the inside of the sink with the spray attachment. She
turned off the water and dried herself and stood for a while, thinking; and
then she got a memo pad and a pencil from one of the drawers and went to
the table and sat down and began to write.

She looked at him. “Planning the menu,” she said. “For a party. We’re

giving a party on January twenty-second. A week from next Saturday.” She
looked among several slips of paper on the table and picked one up. “We’re
inviting Elise Dunstan and her husband,” she said, “Joan and a date, Jimmy
and Tiger, Allan and a date, Lou and Claudia, the Chens, the Wendells, Dee

Bertillon and a date unless you don’t want him, Mike and Pedro, Bob and
Thea Goodman, the Kapps”—she pointed in the Kapps’ direction—“and
Doris and Axel Allert, if they’ll come. That’s Hutch’s daughter.”

“I know,” Guy said.
She put down the paper. “Minnie and Roman are not invited,” she said.

“Neither is Laura-Louise. Neither are the Fountains and the Gilmores and
the Weeses. Neither is Dr. Sapirstein. This is a very special party. You have
to be under sixty to get in.”

“Whew,” Guy said. “For a minute there I didn’t think I was going to

make it.”

“Oh, you make it,” Rosemary said. “You’re the bartender.”
“Swell,” Guy said. “Do you really think this is such a great idea?”
“I think it’s the best idea I’ve had in months.”
“Don’t you think you ought to check with Sapirstein first?”
“Why? I’m just going to give a party; I’m not going to swim the English

Channel or climb Annapurna.”

Guy went to the sink and turned on the water. He held a glass under it.

“I’ll be in rehearsal then, you know,” he said. “We start on the seventeenth.”

“You won’t have to do a thing,” Rosemary said. “Just come home and

be charming.”

“And tend bar.” He turned off the water and raised his glass and drank.
“We’ll hire a bartender,” Rosemary said. “The one Joan and Dick used

to have. And when you’re ready to go to sleep I’ll chase everyone out.”

Guy turned around and looked at her.
“I want to see them,” she said. “Not Minnie and Roman. I’m tired of

Minnie and Roman.”

He looked away from her, and then at the floor, and then at her eyes

again. “What about the pain?” he asked.

She smiled drily. “Haven’t you heard?” she said. “It’s going to be gone

in a day or two. Dr. Sapirstein told me so.”

Rosemary took a loose brown velvet hostess gown to the cleaner, made an
appointment to have her hair done, and ordered wine and liquor and ice
cubes and the ingredients of a Chilean seafood casserole called chupe.

On the Thursday morning before the party, Minnie came with the drink

while Rosemary was picking apart crabmeat and lobster tails. “That looks
interesting,” Minnie said, glancing into the kitchen. “What is it?”

Rosemary told her, standing at the front door with the striped glass cold

in her hand. “I’m going to freeze it and then bake it Saturday evening,” she
said. “We’re having some people over.”

“Oh, you feel up to entertaining?” Minnie asked.
“Yes, I do,” Rosemary said. “These are old friends whom we haven’t

seen in a long time. They don’t even know yet that I’m pregnant.”

“I’d be glad to give you a hand if you’d like,” Minnie said. “I could

help you dish things out.”

“Thank you, that’s sweet of you,” Rosemary said, “but I really can

manage by myself. It’s going to be buffet, and there’ll be very little to do.”

“I could help you take the coats.”
“No, really, Minnie, you do enough for me as it is. Really.”
Minnie said, “Well, let me know if you change your mind. Drink your

drink now.”

Rosemary looked at the glass in her hand. “I’d rather not,” she said, and

looked up at Minnie. “Not this minute. I’ll drink it in a little while and bring
the glass back to you.”

Minnie said, “It doesn’t do to let it stand.”
“I won’t wait long,” Rosemary said. “Go on. You go back and I’ll bring

the glass to you later on.”

“I’ll wait and save you the walk.”
“You’ll do no such thing,” Rosemary said. “I get very nervous if anyone

watches me while I’m cooking. I’m going out later, so I’ll be passing right
by your door.”

“Going out?”
“Shopping. Scoot now, go on. You’re too nice to me, really you are.”
Minnie backed away. “Don’t wait too long,” she said. “It’s going to lose

its vitamins.”

Rosemary closed the door. She went into the kitchen and stood for a

the drink in a pale green spire drilling straight down into the drain.

She finished the chupe, humming and feeling pleased with herself.

When it was covered and stowed away in the freezer compartment she
made her own drink out of milk, cream, an egg, sugar, and sherry. Shaken in
a covered jar, it poured out tawny and delicious-looking. “Hang on, David-
or-Amanda,” she said, and tasted it and found it great.

Then the Wendells came—Ted and Carole—and a minute later Elise

Dunstan and her husband Hugh, who limped. And then Allan Stone, Guy’s
agent, with a beautiful Negro model named Rain Morgan, and Jimmy and
Tiger, and Lou and Claudia Comfort and Claudia’s brother Scott.

Guy put the coats on the bed; Renato mixed drinks quickly, looking less

bored. Rosemary pointed and gave names: “Jimmy, Tiger, Rain, Allan,
Elise, Hugh, Carole, Ted—Claudia and Lou and Scott.”

Bob and Thea Goodman brought another couple, Peggy and Stan

Keeler. “Of course it’s all right,” Rosemary said; “don’t be silly, the more
the merrier!” The Kapps came without coats. “What a trip!” Mr. Kapp (“It’s
Bernard”) said. “A bus, three trains, and a ferry! We left five hours ago!”

“Can I look around?” Claudia asked. “If the rest of it’s as nice as this

I’m going to cut my throat.”

Mike and Pedro brought bouquets of bright red roses. Pedro, with his

cheek against Rosemary’s, murmured, “Make him feed you, baby; you look
like a bottle of iodine.”

Rosemary said, “Phyllis, Bernard, Peggy, Stan, Thea, Bob, Lou, Scott,

Carole…”

She took the roses into the kitchen. Elise came in with a drink and a

fake cigarette for breaking the habit. “You’re so lucky,” she said; “it’s the
greatest apartment I’ve ever seen. Will you look at this kitchen? Are you all
right, Rosie? You look a little tired.”

“Thanks for the understatement,” Rosemary said. “I’m not all right but I

will be. I’m pregnant.”

“You aren’t! How great! When?”
“June twenty-eighth. I go into my fifth month on Friday.”
“That’s great!” Elise said. “How do you like C. C. Hill? Isn’t he the

dreamboy of the western world?”

“Yes, but I’m not using him,” Rosemary said.
“No!”
“I’ve got a doctor named Sapirstein, an older man.”
“What for? He can’t be better than Hill!”
“He’s fairly well known and he’s a friend of some friends of ours,”

Rosemary said.

Guy looked in.
Elise said, “Well congratulations, Dad.”
“Thanks,” Guy said. “Weren’t nothin’ to it. Do you want me to bring in

the dip, Ro?”

“Oh, yes, would you? Look at these roses! Mike and Pedro brought

them.”

Guy took a tray of crackers and a bowl of pale pink dip from the table.

“Would you get the other one?” he asked Elise.

“Sure,” she said, and took a second bowl and followed after him.
“I’ll be out in a minute,” Rosemary called.
Dee Bertillon brought Portia Haynes, an actress, and Joan called to say

that she and her date had got stuck at another party and would be there in
half an hour.

Tiger said, “You dirty stinking secret-keeper!” She grabbed Rosemary

and kissed her.

is.”

She put one vase of roses on the mantel—“Congratulations,” Rain

Morgan said, “I understand you’re pregnant”—and the other in the bedroom
on the dressing table. When she came out Renato made a Scotch and water
for her. “I make the first ones strong,” he said, “to get them happy. Then I
go light and conserve.”

Mike wig-wagged over heads and mouthed Congratulations. She

smiled and mouthed Thanks.

“The Trench sisters lived here,” someone said; and Bernard Kapp said,

“Adrian Marcato too, and Keith Kennedy.”

“And Pearl Ames,” Phyllis Kapp said.
“The Trent sisters?” Jimmy asked.
“Trench,” Phyllis said. “They ate little children.”
“And she doesn’t mean just ate them,” Pedro said; “she means ate

them!”

Rosemary shut her eyes and held her breath as the pain wound tighter.

Maybe because of the drink; she put it aside.

“Are you all right?” Claudia asked her.
“Yes, fine,” she said, and smiled. “I had a cramp for a moment.”
Guy was talking with Tiger and Portia Haynes and Dee. “It’s too soon

to say,” he said; “we’ve only been in rehearsal six days. It plays much better
than it reads, though.”

“It couldn’t play much worse,” Tiger said. “Hey, what ever happened to

the other guy? Is he still blind?”

“I don’t know,” Guy said.
Portia said, “Donald Baumgart? You know who he is, Tiger; he’s the

boy Zöe Piper lives with.”

“Oh, is he the one?” Tiger said. “Gee, I didn’t know he was someone I

knew.”

“He’s writing a great play,” Portia said. “At least the first two scenes are

great. Really burning anger, like Osborne before he made it.”

Rosemary said, “Is he still blind?”
“Oh, yes,” Portia said. “They’ve pretty much given up hope. He’s going

through hell trying to make the adjustment. But this great play is coming
out of it. He dictates and Zöe writes.”

Joan came. Her date was over fifty. She took Rosemary’s arm and

pulled her aside, looking frightened. “What’s the matter with you?” she
asked. “What’s wrong?”

“Nothing’s wrong,” Rosemary said. “I’m pregnant, that’s all.”

Elise said, “What did you say your doctor’s name was?”
“Sapirstein,” Rosemary said.
Joan said, “And he’s satisfied with your condition?”
Rosemary nodded.
“Claudia said you had a cramp a while ago.”
“I have a pain,” she said. “But it’s going to stop soon; it’s not

abnormal.”

Tiger said, “What kind of a pain?”
“A—a pain. A sharp pain, that’s all. It’s because my pelvis is expanding

and my joints are a little stiff.”

Elise said, “Rosie, I’ve had that—two times—and all it ever meant was

a few days of like a Charley horse, an ache through the whole area.”

“Well, everyone is different,” Rosemary said, lifting salad between two

wooden spoons and letting it drop back into the bowl again. “Every
pregnancy is different.”

“Not that different,” Joan said. “You look like Miss Concentration

Camp of 1966. Are you sure this doctor knows what he’s doing?”

Rosemary began to sob, quietly and defeatedly, holding the spoons in

the salad. Tears ran from her cheeks.

“Oh, God,” Joan said, and looked for help to Tiger, who touched

Rosemary’s shoulder and said, “Shh, ah, shh, don’t cry, Rosemary. Shh.”

“It’s good,” Elise said. “It’s the best thing. Let her. She’s been wound up

all night like—like I-don’t-know-what.”

Rosemary wept, black streaks smearing down her cheeks. Elise put her

into a chair; Tiger took the spoons from her hands and moved the salad
bowl to the far side of the table.

The door started to open and Joan ran to it and stopped and blocked it. It

was Guy. “Hey, let me in,” he said.

“Sorry,” Joan said. “Girls only.”
“Let me speak to Rosemary.”
“Can’t; she’s busy.”
“Look,” he said, “I’ve got to wash glasses.”
“Use the bathroom.” She shouldered the door click-closed and leaned

against it.

“Damn it, open the door,” he said outside.
Rosemary went on crying, her head bowed, her shoulders heaving, her

hands limp in her lap. Elise, crouching, wiped at her cheeks every few
moments with the end of a towel; Tiger smoothed her hair and tried to still
her shoulders.

The tears slowed.
“It hurts so much,” she said. She raised her face to them. “And I’m so

afraid the baby is going to die.”

“Is he doing anything for you?” Elise asked. “Giving you any medicine,

any treatment?”

“Nothing, nothing.”
Tiger said, “When did it start?”
She sobbed.
Elise asked, “When did the pain start, Rosie?”
“Before Thanksgiving,” she said. “November.”
Elise said, “In November?” and Joan at the door said, “What?” Tiger

said, “You’ve been in pain since November and he isn’t doing anything for
you?”

“He says it’ll stop.”
Joan said, “Has he brought in another doctor to look at you?”
Rosemary shook her head. “He’s a very good doctor,” she said with

Elise wiping at her cheeks. “He’s well known. He was on Open End.”

Tiger said, “He sounds like a sadistic nut, Rosemary.”
Elise said, “Pain like that is a warning that something’s not right. I’m

sorry to scare you, Rosie, but you go see Dr. Hill. See somebody besides
that—”

“That nut,” Tiger said.
Elise said, “He can’t be right, letting you just go on suffering.”

“I won’t have an abortion,” Rosemary said.
Joan leaned forward from the door and whispered, “Nobody’s telling

you to have an abortion! Just go see another doctor, that’s all.”

Rosemary took the towel from Elise and pressed it to each eye in turn.

“He said this would happen,” she said, looking at mascara on the towel.
“That my friends would think their pregnancies were normal and mine
wasn’t.”

“What do you mean?” Tiger asked.
Rosemary looked at her. “He told me not to listen to what my friends

might say,” she said.

Tiger said, “Well you do listen! What kind of sneaky advice is that for a

doctor to give?”

Elise said, “All we’re telling you to do is check with another doctor. I

don’t think any reputable doctor would object to that, if it would help his
patient’s peace of mind.”

“You do it,” Joan said. “First thing Monday morning.”
“I will,” Rosemary said.
“You promise?” Elise asked.
Rosemary nodded. “I promise.” She smiled at Elise, and at Tiger and

Joan. “I feel a lot better,” she said. “Thank you.”

“Well you look a lot worse,” Tiger said, opening her purse. “Fix your

eyes. Fix everything.” She put large and small compacts on the table before
Rosemary, and two long tubes and a short one.

“Look at my dress,” Rosemary said.
“A damp cloth,” Elise said, taking the towel and going to the sink with

it.

“The garlic bread!” Rosemary cried.
“In or out?” Joan asked.
“In.” Rosemary pointed with a mascara brush at two foil-wrapped

loaves on top of the refrigerator.

Tiger began tossing the salad and Elise wiped at the lap of Rosemary’s

gown. “Next time you’re planning to cry,” she said, “don’t wear velvet.”

Guy came in and looked at them.
Tiger said, “We’re trading beauty secrets. You want some?”
“Are you all right?” he asked Rosemary.
“Yes, fine,” she said with a smile.

“A little spilled salad dressing,” Elise said.
Joan said, “Could the kitchen staff get a round of drinks, do you think?”

Renato approved of the wine, opened it with a flourish, and served it

solemnly.

Claudia’s brother Scott, in the den with a plate on his knee, said, “His

name is Altizer and he’s down in—Atlanta, I think; and what he says is that
the death of God is a specific historic event that happened right now, in our
time. That God literally died.” The Kapps and Rain Morgan and Bob
Goodman sat listening and eating.

Jimmy, at one of the living-room windows, said, “Hey, it’s beginning to

snow!”

Stan Keeler told a string of wicked Polish-jokes and Rosemary laughed

out loud at them. “Careful of the booze,” Guy murmured at her shoulder.
She turned and showed him her glass, and said, still laughing, “It’s only
ginger ale!”

Joan’s over-fifty date sat on the floor by her chair, talking up to her

earnestly and fondling her feet and ankles. Elise talked to Pedro; he nodded,
watching Mike and Allan across the room. Claudia began reading palms.

They were low on Scotch but everything else was holding up fine.
She served coffee, emptied ashtrays, and rinsed out glasses. Tiger and

Carole Wendell helped her.

Later she sat in a bay with Hugh Dunstan, sipping coffee and watching

fat wet snowflakes shear down, an endless army of them, with now and then
an outrider striking one of the diamond panes and sliding and melting.

“Year after year I swear I’m going to leave the city,” Hugh Dunstan

said; “get away from the crime and the noise and all the rest of it. And
every year it snows or the New Yorker has a Bogart Festival and I’m still
here.”

Rosemary smiled and watched the snow. “This is why I wanted this

apartment,” she said; “to sit here and watch the snow, with the fire going.”

Hugh looked at her and said, “I’ll bet you still read Dickens.”

“Of course I do,” she said. “Nobody stops reading Dickens.”
Guy came looking for her. “Bob and Thea are leaving,” he said.

“The thing to do now,” Guy said, “is move.”
“Guy.”
“Yes?”
“I’m going to Dr. Hill. Monday morning.”
He said nothing, looking at her.
“I want him to examine me,” she said. “Dr. Sapirstein is either lying or

else he’s—I don’t know, out of his mind. Pain like this is a warning that
something is wrong.”

“Rosemary,” Guy said.
“And I’m not drinking Minnie’s drink any more,” she said. “I want

vitamins in pills, like everybody else. I haven’t drunk it for three days now.
I’ve made her leave it here and I’ve thrown it away.”

“You’ve—”
“I’ve made my own drink instead,” she said.
He drew together all his surprise and anger and, pointing back over his

shoulder toward the kitchen, cried it at her. “Is that what those bitches were
giving you in there? Is that their hint for today? Change doctors?”

“They’re my friends,” she said; “don’t call them bitches.”
“They’re a bunch of not-very-bright bitches who ought to mind their

own God-damned business.”

“All they said was get a second opinion.”
“You’ve got the best doctor in New York, Rosemary. Do you know what

Dr. Hill is? Charley Nobody, that’s what he is.”

“I’m tired of hearing how great Dr. Sapirstein is,” she said, starting to

cry, “when I’ve got this pain inside me since before Thanksgiving and all
he does is tell me it’s going to stop!”

“You’re not changing doctors,” Guy said. “We’ll have to pay Sapirstein

and pay Hill too. It’s out of the question.”

examine me and give his opinion.”

“I won’t let you,” Guy said. “It’s—it’s not fair to Sapirstein.”
“Not fair to—What are you talking about? What about what’s fair to

me?”

“You want another opinion? All right. Tell Sapirstein; let him be the one

who decides who gives it. At least have that much courtesy to the top man
in his field.”

“I want Dr. Hill,” she said. “If you won’t pay I’ll pay my—” She

stopped short and stood motionless, paralyzed, no part of her moving. A
tear slid on a curved path toward the corner of her mouth.

“Ro?” Guy said.
The pain had stopped. It was gone. Like a stuck auto horn finally put

right. Like anything that stops and is gone and is gone for good and won’t
ever be back again, thank merciful heaven. Gone and finished and oh, how
good she might possibly feel as soon as she caught her breath!

“Ro?” Guy said, and took a step forward, worried.
“It stopped,” she said. “The pain.”
“Stopped?” he said.
“Just now.” She managed to smile at him. “It stopped. Just like that.”

She closed her eyes and took a deep breath, and deeper still, deeper than she
had been allowed to breathe for ages and ages. Since before Thanksgiving.

When she opened her eyes Guy was still looking at her, still looking

worried.

“What was in the drink you made?” he asked.
Her heart dropped out of her. She had killed the baby. With the sherry.

Or a bad egg. Or the combination. The baby had died, the pain had stopped.
The pain was the baby and she had killed it with her arrogance.

“An egg,” she said. “Milk. Cream. Sugar.” She blinked, wiped at her

cheek, looked at him. “Sherry,” she said, trying to make it sound non-toxic.

“How much sherry?” he asked.
Something moved in her.
“A lot?”
Again, where nothing had ever moved before. A rippling little pressure.

She giggled.

“Rosemary, for Christ’s sake, how much?”

“It’s alive,” she said, and giggled again. “It’s moving. It’s all right; it

isn’t dead. It’s moving.” She looked down at her brown-velvet stomach and
put her hands on it and pressed in lightly. Now two things were moving,
two hands or feet; one here, one there.

She reached for Guy, not looking at him; snapped her fingers quickly

for his hand. He came closer and gave it. She put it to the side of her
stomach and held it there. Obligingly the movement came. “You feel it?”
she asked, looking at him. “There, again; you feel it?”

He jerked his hand away, pale. “Yes,” he said. “Yes. I felt it.”
“It’s nothing to be afraid of,” she said, laughing. “It won’t bite you.”
“It’s wonderful,” he said.
“Isn’t it?” She held her stomach again, looking down at it. “It’s alive.

It’s kicking. It’s in there.”

“I’ll clean up some of this mess,” Guy said, and picked up an ashtray

and a glass and another glass.

“All right now, David-or-Amanda,” Rosemary said, “you’ve made your

presence known, so kindly settle down and let Mommy attend to the
cleaning up.” She laughed. “My God,” she said, “it’s so active! That means
a boy, doesn’t it?”

She said, “All right, you, just take it easy. You’ve got five more months

yet, so save your energy.”

And laughing, “Talk to it, Guy; you’re its father. Tell it not to be so

impatient.”

And she laughed and laughed and was crying too, holding her stomach

with both hands.

She drank Minnie’s drink as soon as it was given to her, and drank it to

the last chill drop, driving away as by a ritual the remembered guilt of I-
killed-the-baby. With the drink now came a cake of white gritty sweet stuff
like marzipan; this too she ate at once, as much from enjoyment of its
candylike taste as from a resolve to be the most conscientious expectant
mother in all the world.

Dr. Sapirstein might have been smug about the pain’s stopping, but he

wasn’t, bless him. He simply said “It’s about time” and put his stethoscope
to Rosemary’s really-showing-now belly. Listening to the stirring baby, he
betrayed an excitement that was unexpected in a man who had guided
hundreds upon hundreds of pregnancies. It was this undimmed first-time
excitement, Rosemary thought, that probably marked the difference
between a great obstetrician and a merely good one.

She bought maternity clothes; a two-piece black dress, a beige suit, a

red dress with white polka dots. Two weeks after their own party, she and
Guy went to one given by Lou and Claudia Comfort. “I can’t get over the

change in you!” Claudia said, holding onto both Rosemary’s hands. “You
look a hundred per cent better, Rosemary! A thousand percent!”

And Mrs. Gould across the hall said, “You know, we were quite

concerned about you a few weeks ago; you looked so drawn and
uncomfortable. But now you look like an entirely different person, really
you do. Arthur remarked on the change just last evening.”

“I feel much better now,” Rosemary said. “Some pregnancies start out

bad and turn good, and some go the other way around. I’m glad I’ve had the
bad first and have gotten it out of the way.”

She was aware now of minor pains that had been overshadowed by the

major one—aches in her spinal muscles and her swollen breasts—but these
discomforts had been mentioned as typical in the paperback book Dr.
Sapirstein had made her throw away; they felt typical too, and they
increased rather than lessened her sense of well-being. Salt was still
nauseating, but what, after all, was salt?

Guy’s show, with its director changed twice and its title changed three

times, opened in Philadelphia in mid-February. Dr. Sapirstein didn’t allow
Rosemary to go along on the try-out-tour, and so on the afternoon of the
opening, she and Minnie and Roman drove to Philadelphia with Jimmy and
Tiger, in Jimmy’s antique Packard. The drive was a less than joyous one.
Rosemary and Jimmy and Tiger had seen a barestage run-through of the
play before the company left New York and they were doubtful of its
chances. The best they hoped for was that Guy would be singled out for
praise by one or more of the critics, a hope Roman encouraged by citing
instances of great actors who had come to notice in plays of little or no
distinction.

verbose; the party afterwards was broken up into small separate enclaves of
silent gloom. Guy’s mother, having flown down from Montreal, insisted to
their group that Guy was superb and the play was superb. Small, blonde,
and vivacious, she chirped her confidence to Rosemary and Allan Stone and
Jimmy and Tiger and Guy himself and Minnie and Roman. Minnie and
Roman smiled serenely; the others sat and worried. Rosemary thought that
Guy had been even better than superb, but she had thought so too on seeing
him in Luther and Nobody Loves An Albatross, in neither of which he had
attracted critical attention.

Guy with enthusiastic praise, in one case two solid paragraphs of it. A third
review, which appeared the next morning, was headed Dazzling
Performance Sparks New Comedy-Drama and spoke of Guy as “a virtually
unknown young actor of slashing authority” who was “sure to go on to
bigger and better productions.”

The ride back to New York was far happier than the ride out.
Rosemary found much to keep her busy while Guy was away. There

was the white-and-yellow nursery wallpaper finally to be ordered, and the
crib and the bureau and the bathinette. There were long-postponed letters to
be written, telling the family all the news; there were baby clothes and more
maternity clothes to be shopped for; there were assorted decisions to be
made, about birth announcements and breast-or-bottle and the name, the
name, the name. Andrew or Douglas or David; Amanda or Jenny or Hope.

And there were exercises to be done, morning and evening, for she was

having the baby by natural childbirth. She had strong feelings on the subject
and Dr. Sapirstein concurred with them wholeheartedly. He would give her
an anesthetic only if at the very last moment she asked for one. Lying on the
floor, she raised her legs straight up in the air and held them there for a
count of ten; she practiced shallow breathing and panting, imagining the
sweaty triumphant moment when she would see whatever-its-name-was
coming inch by inch out of her effectively helping body.

She spent evenings at Minnie and Roman’s, one at the Kapps’, and

another at Hugh and Elise Dunstan’s. (“You don’t have a nurse yet?” Elise
asked. “You should have arranged for one long ago; they’ll all be booked by
now.” But Dr. Sapirstein, when she called him about it the next day, told her
that he had lined up a fine nurse who would stay with her for as long as she
wanted after the delivery. Hadn’t he mentioned it before? Miss Fitzpatrick;
one of the best.)

Guy called every second or third night after the show. He told

Rosemary of the changes that were being made and of the rave he had got
in Variety; she told him about Miss Fitzpatrick and the wallpaper and the
shaped-all-wrong bootees that Laura-Louise was knitting.

The show folded after fifteen performances and Guy was home again,

only to leave two days later for California and a Warner Brothers screen
test. And then he was home for good, with two great next-season parts to

choose from and thirteen half-hour Greenwich Village’s to do. Warner
Brothers made an offer and Allan turned it down.

The baby kicked like a demon. Rosemary told it to stop or she would

start kicking back.

Her sister Margaret’s husband called to tell of the birth of an eight-

pound boy, Kevin Michael, and later a too-cute announcement came—an
impossibly rosy baby megaphoning his name, birth date, weight, and
length. (Guy said, “What, no blood type?”) Rosemary decided on simple
engraved announcements, with nothing but the baby’s name, their name,
and the date. And it would be Andrew John or Jennifer Susan. Definitely.
Breast-fed, not bottle-fed.

They moved the television set into the living room and gave the rest of

the den furniture to friends who could use it. The wallpaper came, was
perfect, and was hung; the crib and bureau and bathinette came and were
placed first one way and then another. Into the bureau Rosemary put
receiving blankets, waterproof pants, and shirts so tiny that, holding one up,
she couldn’t keep from laughing.

“Andrew John Woodhouse,” she said, “stop it! You’ve got two whole

months yet!”

They celebrated their second anniversary and Guy’s thirty-third

birthday; they gave another party—a sit-down dinner for the Dunstans, the
Chens, and Jimmy and Tiger; they saw Morgan! and a preview of Mame.

Bigger and bigger Rosemary grew, her breasts lifting higher atop her

ballooning belly that was drum-solid with its navel flattened away, that
rippled and jutted with the movements of the baby inside it. She did her
exercises morning and evening, lifting her legs, sitting on her heels,
shallow-breathing, panting.

At the end of May, when she went into her ninth month, she packed a

small suitcase with the things she would need at the hospital—nightgowns,
nursing brassieres, a new quilted housecoat, and so on—and set it ready by
the bedroom door.

the news. There would be a memorial service on Tuesday morning at
eleven, he said, at the Ethical Culture Center on West Sixty-fourth Street.

Rosemary wept, partly because Hutch was dead and partly because she

had all but forgotten him in the past few months and felt now as if she had
hastened his dying. Once or twice Grace Cardiff had called and once
Rosemary had called Doris Allert; but she hadn’t gone to see Hutch; there
had seemed no point in it when he was still frozen in coma, and having
been restored to health herself, she had been averse to being near someone
sick, as if she and the baby might somehow have been endangered by the
nearness.

Guy, when he heard the news, turned bloodless gray and was silent and

self-enclosed for several hours. Rosemary was surprised by the depth of his
reaction.

get free and Joan begged off with a virus. Some fifty people were there, in a
handsome paneled auditorium. The service began soon after eleven and was
quite short. Axel Allert spoke, and then another man who apparently had
known Hutch for many years. Afterwards Rosemary followed the general
movement toward the front of the auditorium and said a word of sympathy
to the Allerts and to Hutch’s other daughter, Edna, and her husband. A
woman touched her arm and said, “Excuse me, you’re Rosemary, aren’t
you?”—a stylishly dressed woman in her early fifties, with gray hair and an
exceptionally fine complexion. “I’m Grace Cardiff.”

Rosemary took her hand and greeted her and thanked her for the phone

calls she had made.

“I was going to mail this last evening,” Grace Cardiff said, holding a

book-size brown-paper package, “and then I realized that I’d probably be
seeing you this morning.” She gave Rosemary the package; Rosemary saw
her own name and address printed on it, and Grace Cardiff’s return address.

“What is it?” she asked.
“It’s a book Hutch wanted you to have; he was very emphatic about it.”
Rosemary didn’t understand.
“He was conscious at the end for a few minutes,” Grace Cardiff said. “I

wasn’t there, but he told a nurse to tell me to give you the book on his desk.
Apparently he was reading it the night he was stricken. He was very

insistent, told the nurse two or three times and made her promise not to
forget. And I’m to tell you that ‘the name is an anagram.’”

“The name of the book?”
“Apparently. He was delirious, so it’s hard to be sure. He seemed to

fight his way out of the coma and then die of the effort. First he thought it
was the next morning, the morning after the coma began, and he spoke
about having to meet you at eleven o’clock—”

“Yes, we had an appointment,” Rosemary said.
“And then he seemed to realize what had happened and he began telling

the nurse that I was to give you the book. He repeated himself a few times
and that was the end.” Grace Cardiff smiled as if she were making pleasant
conversation. “It’s an English book about witchcraft,” she said.

Rosemary, looking doubtfully at the package, said, “I can’t imagine why

he wanted me to have it.”

“He did though, so there you are. And the name is an anagram. Sweet

Hutch. He made everything sound like a boy’s adventure, didn’t he?”

They walked together out of the auditorium and out of the building onto

the sidewalk.

“I’m going uptown; can I drop you anywhere?” Grace Cardiff asked.
“No, thank you,” Rosemary said. “I’m going down and across.”
They went to the corner. Other people who had been at the service were

hailing taxis; one pulled up, and the two men who had got it offered it to
Rosemary. She tried to decline and, when the men insisted, offered it to
Grace Cardiff, who wouldn’t have it either. “Certainly not,” she said. “Take
full advantage of your lovely condition. When is the baby due?”

“June twenty-eighth,” Rosemary said. Thanking the men, she got into

the cab. It was a small one and getting into it wasn’t easy.

“Good luck,” Grace Cardiff said, closing the door.
“Thank you,” Rosemary said, “and thank you for the book.” To the

driver she said, “The Bramford, please.” She smiled through the open
window at Grace Cardiff as the cab pulled away.

The doorbell rang and she went to answer it holding the still-unopened

package; it was Minnie with the drink and the little white cake. “I heard you
come in,” she said. “It certainly wasn’t very long.”

“It was nice,” Rosemary said, taking the glass. “His son-in-law and

another man talked a little about what he was like and why he’ll be missed,
and that was it.” She drank some of the thin pale-green.

“That sounds like a sensible way of doing it,” Minnie said. “You got

mail already?”

“No, someone gave it to me,” Rosemary said, and drank again, deciding

not to go into who and why and the whole story of Hutch’s return to
consciousness.

“Here, I’ll hold it,” Minnie said, and took the package—“Oh, thanks,”

Rosemary said—so that Rosemary could take the white cake.

Rosemary ate and drank.
“A book?” Minnie asked, weighing the package.
“Mm-hmm. She was going to mail it and then she realized she’d be

seeing me.”

Gilmores used to live there before they moved over to where they are now.”

“Oh?”
“I’ve been there lots of times. ‘Grace.’ That’s one of my favorite names.

One of your girl friends?”

“Yes,” Rosemary said; it was easier than explaining and it made no

difference really.

She finished the cake and the drink, and took the package from Minnie

and gave her the glass. “Thanks,” she said, smiling.

“Say listen,” Minnie said, “Roman’s going down to the cleaner in a

while; do you have anything to go or pick up?”

“No, nothing, thanks. Will we see you later?”
“Sure. Take a nap, why don’t you?”
“I’m going to. ’By.”
She closed the door and went into the kitchen. With a paring knife she

cut the string of the package and undid its brown paper. The book within
was All Of Them Witches by J. R. Hanslet. It was a black book, not new, its
gold lettering all but worn away. On the flyleaf was Hutch’s signature, with
the inscription Torquay, 1934 beneath it. At the bottom of the inside cover
was a small blue sticker imprinted J. Waghorn & Son, Booksellers.

Rosemary took the book into the living room, riffling its pages as she

went. There were occasional photographs of respectable-looking Victorians,
and, in the text, several of Hutch’s underlinings and marginal checkmarks
that she recognized from books he had lent her in the Higgins-Eliza period
of their friendship. One underlined phrase was “the fungus they call
‘Devil’s Pepper.’”

She sat in one of the window bays and looked at the table of contents.

The name Adrian Marcato jumped to her eye; it was the title of the fourth
chapter. Other chapters dealt with other people—all of them, it was to be
presumed from the book’s title, witches: Gilles de Rais, Jane Wenham,
Aleister Crowley, Thomas Weir. The final chapters were Witch Practices
and Witchcraft and Satanism.

Turning to the fourth chapter, Rosemary glanced over its twenty-odd

pages; Marcato was born in Glasgow in 1846, he was brought soon after to
New York (underlined), and he died on the island of Corfu in 1922. There
were accounts of the 1896 tumult when he claimed to have called forth

Satan and was attacked by a mob outside the Bramford (not in the lobby as
Hutch had said), and of similar happenings in Stockholm in 1898 and Paris
in 1899. He was a hypnotic-eyed black-bearded man who, in a standing
portrait, looked fleetingly familiar to Rosemary. Overleaf there was a less
formal photograph of him sitting at a Paris café table with his wife Hessia
and his son Steven (underlined).

Was this why Hutch had wanted her to have the book; so that she could

read in detail about Adrian Marcato? But why? Hadn’t he issued his
warnings long ago, and acknowledged later on that they were unjustified?
She flipped through the rest of the book, pausing near the end to read other
underlinings. “The stubborn fact remains,” one read, “that whether or not
we believe, they most assuredly do.” And a few pages later: “the universally
held belief in the power of fresh blood.” And “surrounded by candles,
which needless to say are also black.”

The black candles Minnie had brought over on the night of the power

failure. Hutch had been struck by them and had begun asking questions
about Minnie and Roman. Was this the book’s meaning; that they were
witches? Minnie with her herbs and tannis-charms, Roman with his piercing
eyes? But there were no witches, were there? Not really.

She remembered then the other part of Hutch’s message, that the name

of the book was an anagram. All Of Them Witches. She tried to juggle the
letters in her head, to transpose them into something meaningful, revealing.
She couldn’t; there were too many of them to keep track of. She needed a
pencil and paper. Or better yet, the Scrabble set.

She got it from the bedroom and, sitting in the bay again, put the

unopened board on her knees and picked out from the box beside her the
letters to spell All Of Them Witches. The baby, which had been still all
morning, began moving inside her. You’re going to be a born Scrabble-
player, she thought, smiling. It kicked. “Hey, easy,” she said.

With All Of Them Witches laid out on the board, she jumbled the letters

and mixed them around, then looked to see what else could be made of
them. She found comes with the fall and, after a few minutes of rearranging
the flat wood tiles, how is hell fact met. Neither of which seemed to mean
anything. Nor was there revelation in who shall meet it, we that chose ill,
and if he shall come, all of which weren’t real anagrams anyway, since they
used less than the full complement of letters. It was foolishness. How could

the title of a book have a hidden anagram message for her and her alone?
Hutch had been delirious; hadn’t Grace Cardiff said so? Time-wasting. Elf
shot lame witch. Tell me which fatso.

But maybe it was the name of the author, not the book, that was the

anagram. Maybe J. R. Hanslet was a pen name; it didn’t sound like a real
one, when you stopped to think about it.

She took new letters.
The baby kicked.
J. R. Hanslet was Jan Shrelt. Or J. H. Snartle.
Now that really made sense.
Poor Hutch.
She took up the board and tilted it, spilling the letters back into the box.
The book, which lay open on the window seat beyond the box, had

turned its pages to the picture of Adrian Marcato and his wife and son.
Perhaps Hutch had pressed hard there, holding it open while he underlined
“Steven.”

The baby lay quiet in her, not moving.
She put the board on her knees again and took from the box the letters

of Steven Marcato. When the name lay spelled before her, she looked at it
for a moment and then began transposing the letters. With no false moves
and no wasted motion she made them into Roman Castevet.

And then again into Steven Marcato.
And then again into Roman Castevet.
The baby stirred ever so slightly.

She was just beginning the chapter called Witchcraft and Satanism

when the front door unlocked and was pushed against the chain. The
doorbell rang as she went to see who it was. It was Guy.

“What’s with the chain?” he asked when she had let him in.
She said nothing, closing the door and rechaining it.

“What’s the matter?” He had a bunch of daisies and a box from

Bronzini.

“I’ll tell you inside,” she said as he gave her the daisies and a kiss.
“Are you all right?” he asked.
“Yes,” she said. She went into the kitchen.
“How was the memorial?”
“Very nice. Very short.”
“I got the shirt that was in The New Yorker,” he said, going to the

bedroom. “Hey,” he called, “On A Clear Day and Skyscraper are both
closing.”

She put the daisies in a blue pitcher and brought them into the living

room. Guy came in and showed her the shirt. She admired it.

Then she said, “Do you know who Roman really is?”
Guy looked at her, blinked, and frowned. “What do you mean, honey?”

he said. “He’s Roman.”

“He’s Adrian Marcato’s son,” she said. “The man who said he conjured

up Satan and was attacked downstairs by a mob. Roman is his son Steven.
‘Roman Castevet’ is ‘Steven Marcato’ rearranged—an anagram.”

Guy said, “Who told you?”
“Hutch,” Rosemary said. She told Guy about All Of Them Witches and

Hutch’s message. She showed him the book, and he put aside his shirt and
took it and looked at it, looked at the title page and the table of contents and
then sprung the pages out slowly from under his thumb, looking at all of
them.

“There he is when he was thirteen,” Rosemary said. “See the eyes?”
“It might just possibly be a coincidence,” Guy said.
“And another coincidence that he’s living here? In the same house

Steven Marcato was brought up in?” Rosemary shook her head. “The ages
match too,” she said. “Steven Marcato was born in August, 1886, which
would make him seventy-nine now. Which is what Roman is. It’s no
coincidence.”

“No, I guess it’s not,” Guy said, springing out more pages. “I guess he’s

Steven Marcato, all right. The poor old geezer. No wonder he switched his
name around, with a crazy father like that.”

Rosemary looked at Guy uncertainly and said, “You don’t think he’s—

the same as his father?”

“What do you mean?” Guy said, and smiled at her. “A witch? A devil

worshiper?”

She nodded.
“Ro,” he said. “Are you kidding? Do you really—” He laughed and

gave the book back to her. “Ah, Ro, honey,” he said.

“It’s a religion,” she said. “It’s an early religion that got—pushed into

the corner.”

“All right,” he said, “but today?”
“His father was a martyr to it,” she said. “That’s how it must look to

him. Do you know where Adrian Marcato died? In a stable. On Corfu.
Wherever that is. Because they wouldn’t let him into the hotel. Really. ‘No
room at the inn.’ So he died in the stable. And he was with him. Roman. Do
you think he’s given it up after that?”

“Honey, it’s 1966,” Guy said.
“This book was published in 1933,” Rosemary said; “there were covens

in Europe—that’s what they’re called, the groups, the congregations;
covens—in Europe, in North and South America, in Australia; do you think
they’ve all died out in just thirty-three years? They’ve got a coven here,
Minnie and Roman, with Laura-Louise and the Fountains and the Gilmores
and the Weeses; those parties with the flute and the chanting, those are
sabbaths or esbats or whatever-they-are!”

“Honey,” Guy said, “don’t get excited. Let’s—”
“Read what they do, Guy,” she said, holding the book open at him and

jabbing a page with her forefinger. “They use blood in their rituals, because
blood has power, and the blood that has the most power is a baby’s blood, a
baby that hasn’t been baptized; and they use more than the blood, they use
the flesh too!”

“For God’s sake, Rosemary!”
“Why have they been so friendly to us?” she demanded.
“Because they’re friendly people! What do you think they are,

maniacs?”

“Yes! Yes. Maniacs who think they have magic power, who think

they’re real storybook witches, who perform all sorts of crazy rituals and
practices because they’re—sick and crazy maniacs!”

“Honey—”

That’s how Hutch caught on. And their living room is clear in the middle so
that they have room.”

“Honey,” Guy said, “they’re old people and they have a bunch of old

friends, and Dr. Shand happens to play the recorder. You can get black
candles right down in the hardware store, and red ones and green ones and
blue ones. And their living room is clear because Minnie is a lousy
decorator. Roman’s father was a nut, okay; but that’s no reason to think that
Roman is too.”

“Either one of them. Or Laura-Louise or any of the others. And they’re not
coming within fifty feet of the baby.”

“The fact that Roman changed his name proves that he’s not like his

father,” Guy said. “If he were he’d be proud of the name and would have
kept it.”

“He did keep it,” Rosemary said. “He switched it around, but he didn’t

really change it for something else. And this way he can get into hotels.”
She went away from Guy, to the window where the Scrabble set lay. “I
won’t let them in again,” she said. “And as soon as the baby is old enough I
want to sub-let and move. I don’t want them near us. Hutch was right; we
never should have moved in here.” She looked out the window, holding the
book clamped in both hands, trembling.

Guy watched her for a moment. “What about Dr. Sapirstein?” he said.

“Is he in the coven too?”

She turned and looked at him.
“After all,” he said, “there’ve been maniac doctors, haven’t there? His

big ambition is probably to make house calls on a broomstick.”

She turned to the window again, her face sober. “No, I don’t think he’s

one of them,” she said. “He’s—too intelligent.”

“And besides, he’s Jewish,” Guy said and laughed. “Well, I’m glad

you’ve exempted somebody from your McCarthy-type smear campaign.
Talk about witch-hunting, wow! And guilt by association.”

“I’m not saying they’re really witches,” Rosemary said. “I know they

haven’t got real power. But there are people who do believe, even if we
don’t; just the way my family believes that God hears their prayers and that
the wafer is the actual body of Jesus. Minnie and Roman believe their

religion, believe it and practice it, I know they do; and I’m not going to take
any chances with the baby’s safety.”

“We’re not going to sub-let and move,” Guy said.
“Yes we are,” Rosemary said, turning to him.
He picked up his new shirt. “We’ll talk about it later,” he said.
“He lied to you,” she said. “His father wasn’t a producer. He didn’t have

anything to do with the theater at all.”

“All right, so he’s a bullthrower,” Guy said; “who the hell isn’t?” He

went into the bedroom.

Rosemary sat down next to the Scrabble set. She closed it and, after a

moment, opened the book and began again to read the final chapter,
Witchcraft and Satanism.

Guy came back in without the shirt. “I don’t think you ought to read any

more of that,” he said.

Rosemary said, “I just want to read this last chapter.”
“Not today, honey,” Guy said, coming to her; “you’ve got yourself

worked up enough as it is. It’s not good for you or the baby.” He put his
hand out and waited for her to give him the book.

“I’m not worked up,” she said.
“You’re shaking,” he said. “You’ve been shaking for five minutes now.

Come on, give it to me. You’ll read it tomorrow.”

“Guy—”
“No,” he said. “I mean it. Come on, give it to me.”
She said “Ohh” and gave it to him. He went over to the bookshelves,

stretched up, and put it as high as he could reach, across the tops of the two
Kinsey Reports.

“You’ll read it tomorrow,” he said. “You’ve had too much stirring-up

today already, with the memorial and all.”

“Marcato,” Rosemary said.
“Fantastic,” Dr. Sapirstein said. “I had no idea whatsoever. I think he

told me once that his father was a coffee importer. Yes, I remember him
going on about different grades and different ways of grinding the beans.”

“He told Guy that he was a producer.”
Dr. Sapirstein shook his head. “It’s no wonder he’s ashamed of the

truth,” he said. “And it’s no wonder that you’re upset at having discovered
it. I’m as sure as I am of anything on earth that Roman doesn’t hold any of
his father’s weird beliefs, but I can understand completely how disturbed
you must be to have him for a close neighbor.”

“I don’t want anything more to do with him or Minnie,” Rosemary said.

“Maybe I’m being unfair, but I don’t want to take even the slightest chance
where the baby’s safety is concerned.”

“Absolutely,” Dr. Sapirstein said. “Any mother would feel the same

way.”

Rosemary leaned forward. “Is there any chance at all,” she said, “that

Minnie put something harmful in the drink or in those little cakes?”

Dr. Sapirstein laughed. “I’m sorry, dear,” he said; “I don’t mean to

laugh, but really, she’s such a kind old woman and so concerned for the
baby’s well-being…No, there’s no chance at all that she gave you anything
harmful. I would have seen evidence of it long ago, in you or in the baby.”

won’t take anything else from her.”

“You won’t have to,” Dr. Sapirstein said. “I can give you some pills that

will be more than adequate in these last few weeks. In a way this may be
the answer to Minnie and Roman’s problem too.”

“What do you mean?” Rosemary said.
“They want to go away,” Dr. Sapirstein said, “and rather soon. Roman

isn’t well, you know. In fact, and in the strictest of confidence, he hasn’t got
more than a month or two left to him. He wants to pay a last visit to a few
of his favorite cities and they were afraid you might take offense at their
leaving on the eve of the baby’s birth, so to speak. They broached the
subject to me the night before last, wanted to know how I thought you
would take it. They don’t want to upset you by telling you the real reason
for the trip.”

“I’m sorry to hear that Roman isn’t well,” Rosemary said.
“But glad at the prospect of his leaving?” Dr. Sapirstein smiled. “A

perfectly reasonable reaction,” he said, “all things considered. Suppose we
do this, Rosemary: I’ll tell them that I’ve sounded you out and you aren’t at
all offended by the idea of their going; and until they do go—they
mentioned Sunday as a possibility—you continue as before, not letting
Roman know that you’ve learned his true identity. I’m sure he would be
embarrassed and unhappy if he knew, and it seems a shame to upset him
when it’s only a matter of three or four more days.”

Rosemary was silent for a moment, and then she said, “Are you sure

they’ll be leaving on Sunday?”

“I know they’d like to,” Dr. Sapirstein said.
Rosemary considered. “All right,” she said; “I’ll go on as before, but

only until Sunday.”

“If you’d like,” Dr. Sapirstein said, “I can have those pills sent over to

you tomorrow morning; you can get Minnie to leave the drink and the cake
with you and throw them away and take a pill instead.”

“That would be wonderful,” Rosemary said. “I’d be much happier that

way.”

“That’s the main thing at this stage,” Dr. Sapirstein said, “keeping you

happy.”

Abraham Sapirstein Woodhouse.”

“God forbid,” Dr. Sapirstein said.
Guy, when he heard the news, was as pleased as Rosemary. “I’m sorry

Roman is on his last lap,” he said, “but I’m glad for your sake that they’re
going away. I’m sure you’ll feel more relaxed now.”

“Oh, I will,” Rosemary said. “I feel better already, just knowing about

it.”

“I’m green with envy,” Guy said.
Roman said to Rosemary, “I gather this doesn’t come as a complete bolt

from the blue, does it, my dear?” A conspirator’s gleam winked from his
deep-socketed eyes.

“Dr. Sapirstein mentioned you were thinking of going,” Rosemary said.
Minnie said, “We’d have loved to stay till the baby came—”
“You’d be foolish to,” Rosemary said, “now that the hot weather is

here.”

“We’ll send you all kinds of pictures,” Guy said.
“But when Roman gets the wanderlust,” Minnie said, “there’s just no

holding him.”

“It’s true, it’s true,” Roman said. “After a lifetime of traveling I find it

all but impossible to stay in one city for more than a year; and it’s been
fourteen months now since we came back from Japan and the Philippines.”

He told them about Dubrovnik’s special charms, and Madrid’s, and the

Isle of Skye’s. Rosemary watched him, wondering which he really was, an
amiable old talker or the mad son of a mad father.

The next day Minnie made no fuss at all about leaving the drink and the

cake; she was on her way out with a long list of going-away jobs to do.

Rosemary offered to pick up a dress at the cleaner’s for her and buy
toothpaste and dramamine. When she threw away the drink and the cake
and took one of the large white capsules Dr. Sapirstein had sent, she felt just
the slightest bit ridiculous.

On Saturday morning Minnie said, “You know, don’t you, about who

Roman’s father was.”

Rosemary nodded, surprised.
“I could tell by the way you turned sort of cool to us,” Minnie said.

“Oh, don’t apologize, dear; you’re not the first and you won’t be the last. I
can’t say that I really blame you. Oh, I could kill that crazy old man if he
wasn’t dead already! He’s been the bane in poor Roman’s existence! That’s
why he likes to travel so much; he always wants to leave a place before
people can find out who he is. Don’t let on to him that you know, will you?
He’s so fond of you and Guy, it would near about break his heart. I want
him to have a real happy trip with no sorrows, because there aren’t likely to
be many more. Trips, I mean. Would you like the perishables in my icebox?
Send Guy over later on and I’ll load him up.”

seen them that way, seen all of them naked? No, no, that was a dream, a
wild dream that she’d had a long, long time ago.)

The Fountains phoned a good-by to Minnie and Roman, and so did Dr.

Sapirstein and two or three other people whose names Rosemary didn’t
know. Laura-Louise brought out a gift that everyone had chipped in for, a
transistor radio in a pigskin carrying case, and Roman accepted it with an
eloquent thank-you speech, his voice breaking. He knows he’s going to die,
Rosemary thought, and was genuinely sorry for him.

Guy insisted on lending a hand the next morning despite Roman’s

protests; he set the alarm clock for eight-thirty and, when it went off,
hopped into chinos and a T shirt and went around to Minnie and Roman’s
door. Rosemary went with him in her peppermint-striped smock. There was
little to carry; two suitcases and a hatbox. Minnie wore a camera and
Roman his new radio. “Anyone who needs more than one suitcase,” he said
as he double-locked their door, “is a tourist, not a traveler.”

Roman checked through tickets, passport, traveler’s checks, and French
currency. Minnie took Rosemary by the shoulders. “No matter where we
are,” she said, “our thoughts are going to be with you every minute, darling,
till you’re all happy and thin again with your sweet little boy or girl lying
safe in your arms.”

“Thank you,” Rosemary said, and kissed Minnie’s cheek. “Thank you

for everything.”

“You make Guy send us lots of pictures, you hear?” Minnie said,

kissing Rosemary back.

“I will. I will,” Rosemary said.
Minnie turned to Guy. Roman took Rosemary’s hand. “I won’t wish you

luck,” he said, “because you won’t need it. You’re going to have a happy,
happy life.”

She kissed him. “Have a wonderful trip,” she said, “and come back

safely.”

“Perhaps,” he said, smiling. “But I may stay on in Dubrovnik, or

Pescara or maybe Mallorca. We shall see, we shall see…”

“Come back,” Rosemary said, and found herself meaning it. She kissed

him again.

driver. Minnie shouldered and grunted her way in, sweating under the arms
of her white dress. Roman folded himself in beside her. “Kennedy Airport,”
he said; “the TWA Building.”

There were more good-by’s and kisses through open windows, and then

Rosemary and Guy stood waving at the taxi that sped away with hands
ungloved and white-gloved waving from either side of it.

Rosemary felt less happy than she had expected.

“I’m sorry, honey,” he said, “but I just didn’t want you reading any

more of that stuff and upsetting yourself.”

She was surprised and annoyed. “Guy,” she said, “Hutch gave me that

book. He left it to me.”

“I didn’t think about that part of it,” Guy said. “I just didn’t want you

upsetting yourself. I’m sorry.”

“That’s a terrible thing to do.”
“I’m sorry. I wasn’t thinking about Hutch.”
“Even if he hadn’t given it to me, you don’t throw away another

person’s books. If I want to read something, I want to read it.”

“I’m sorry,” he said.
It bothered her all day long. And she had forgotten something that she

meant to ask him; that bothered her too.

She remembered it in the evening, while they were walking back from

La Scala, a restaurant not far from the house. “How did you know Dr.
Shand plays the recorder?” she said.

He didn’t understand.
“The other day,” she said, “when I read the book and we argued about

it; you said that Dr. Shand just happened to play the recorder. How did you
know?”

flute or something through the wall once or twice, and he said that was him.
How did you think I knew?”

“I didn’t think,” Rosemary said. “I just wondered, that’s all.”

Well the baby of course, and whether everything would go the way it

should. She had cheated on her exercises lately. No more of that; solemn
promise.

It was really Monday already, the thirteenth. Fifteen more days. Two

weeks. Probably all women felt edgy and unsettled two weeks before. And
couldn’t sleep from being sick and tired of sleeping on their backs! The first
thing she was going to do after it was all over was sleep twenty-four solid
hours on her stomach, hugging a pillow, with her face snuggled deep down
into it.

She heard a sound in Minnie and Roman’s apartment, but it must have

been from the floor above or the floor below. Sounds were masked and
confused with the air conditioner going.

They were in Paris already. Lucky them. Some day she and Guy would

go, with their three lovely children.

The baby woke up and began moving.

She began to feel contractions; one one day, one the next, then none,

then two.

A postcard came from Paris, with a picture of the Arc de Triomphe and

a neatly written message: Thinking of you both. Lovely weather, excellent
food. The flight over was perfect. Love, Minnie.

The baby dropped low inside her, ready to be born.

could truly benefit from intensive coaching. He explained why, made
Rosemary promise to have Guy call him, and, with final good wishes,
turned toward the elevators. Rosemary caught his arm. “I never thanked you
for the tickets to The Fantasticks,” she said. “I just loved it. It’s going to go
on and on forever, like that Agatha Christie play in London.”

“The Fantasticks?” Dominick said.
“You gave Guy a pair of tickets. Oh, long ago. In the fall. I went with a

friend. Guy had seen it already.”

“I never gave Guy tickets for The Fantasticks,” Dominick said.
“You did. Last fall.”
“No, my dear. I never gave anybody tickets to The Fantasticks; I never

had any to give. You’re mistaken.”

“I’m sure he said he got them from you,” Rosemary said.
“Then he was mistaken,” Dominick said. “You’ll tell him to call me,

yes?”

“Yes. Yes, I will.”
It was strange, Rosemary thought when she was waiting to cross Fifth

Avenue. Guy had said that Dominick had given him the tickets, she was
certain of it. She remembered wondering whether or not to send Dominick a
thank-you note and deciding finally that it wasn’t necessary. She couldn’t be
mistaken.

Walk, the light said, and she crossed the avenue.
But Guy couldn’t have been mistaken either. He didn’t get free tickets

every day of the week; he must have remembered who gave them to him.
Had he deliberately lied to her? Perhaps he hadn’t been given the tickets at
all, but had found and kept them. No, there might have been a scene at the
theater; he wouldn’t have exposed her to that.

She walked west on Fifty-seventh Street, walked very slowly with the

bigness of the baby hanging before her and her back aching from
withstanding its forward-pulling weight. The day was hot and humid;
ninety-two already and still rising. She walked very slowly.

Had he wanted to get her out of the apartment that night for some

reason? Had he gone down and bought the tickets himself? To be free to
study the scene he was working on? But there wouldn’t have been any need
for trickery if that had been the case; more than once in the old one-room
apartment he had asked her to go out for a couple of hours and she had gone

gladly. Most of the time, though, he wanted her to stay, to be his line-feeder,
his audience.

Was it a girl? One of his old flames for whom a couple of hours hadn’t

been enough, and whose perfume he had been washing off in the shower
when she got home? No, it was tannis root not perfume that the apartment
had smelled of that night; she had had to wrap the charm in foil because of
it. And Guy had been far too energetic and amorous to have spent the
earlier part of the night with someone else. He had made unusually violent
love to her, she remembered; later, while he slept, she had heard the flute
and the chanting at Minnie and Roman’s.

No, not the flute. Dr. Shand’s recorder.
Was that how Guy knew about it? Had he been there that evening? At a

sabbath…

want to think any more about witches and covens and baby’s blood and Guy
being over there. Why had she met that stupid Dominick? She should never
have gone out today at all. It was too hot and sticky.

There was a great raspberry crepe dress that looked like a Rudi

Gernreich. After Tuesday, after she was her own real shape again, maybe
she would go in and price it. And a pair of lemon-yellow hip-huggers and a
raspberry blouse…

Eventually, though, she had to go on. Go on walking, go on thinking,

with the baby squirming inside her.

The book (which Guy had thrown away) had told of initiation

ceremonies, of covens inducting novice members with vows and baptism,
with anointing and the infliction of a “witch mark.” Was it possible (the
shower to wash away the smell of a tannis anointing) that Guy had joined
the coven? That he (no, he couldn’t be!) was one of them, with a secret
mark of membership somewhere on his body?

There had been a flesh-colored Band-Aid on his shoulder. It had been

there in his dressing room in Philadelphia (“That damn pimple,” he had said
when she had asked him) and it had been there a few months before (“Not
the same one!” she had said). Was it still there now?

She didn’t know. He didn’t sleep naked any more. He had in the past,

especially in hot weather. But not any more, not for months and months.
Now he wore pajamas every night. When had she last seen him naked?

A car honked at her; she was crossing Sixth Avenue. “For God’s sake,

lady,” a man behind her said.

But why, why? He was Guy, he wasn’t a crazy old man with nothing

better to do, with no other way to find purpose and self-esteem! He had a
career, a busy, exciting, every-day-getting-better career! What did he need
with wands and witch knives and censers and—and junk; with the Weeses
and the Gilmores and Minnie and Roman? What could they give him that
he couldn’t get elsewhere?

She had known the answer before she asked herself the question.

Formulating the question had been a way to put off facing the answer.

The blindness of Donald Baumgart.
If you believed.
But she didn’t. She didn’t.
Yet there Donald Baumgart was, blind, only a day or two after that

Saturday. With Guy staying home to grab the phone every time it rang.
Expecting the news.

The blindness of Donald Baumgart.
Out of which had come everything; the play, the reviews, the new play,

the movie offer…Maybe Guy’s part in Greenwich Village, too, would have
been Donald Baumgart’s if he hadn’t gone inexplicably blind a day or two
after Guy had joined (maybe) a coven (maybe) of witches (maybe).

There were spells to take an enemy’s sight or hearing, the book had

said. All Of Them Witches. (Not Guy!) The united mental force of the whole
coven, a concentrated battery of malevolent wills, could blind, deafen,
paralyze, and ultimately kill the chosen victim.

Paralyze and ultimately kill.
“Hutch?” she asked aloud, standing motionless in front of Carnegie

Hall. A girl looked up at her, clinging to her mother’s hand.

He had been reading the book that night and had asked her to meet him

the next morning. To tell her that Roman was Steven Marcato. And Guy
knew of the appointment, and knowing, went out for—what, ice cream?—
and rang Minnie and Roman’s bell. Was a hasty meeting called? The united
mental force…But how had they known what Hutch would be telling her?
She hadn’t known herself; only he had known.

Suppose, though, that “tannis root” wasn’t “tannis root” at all. Hutch

hadn’t heard of it, had he? Suppose it was—that other stuff he underlined in

the book, Devil’s Fungus or whatever it was. He had told Roman he was
going to look into it; wouldn’t that have been enough to make Roman wary
of him? And right then and there Roman had taken one of Hutch’s gloves,
because the spells can’t be cast without one of the victim’s belongings! And
then, when Guy told them about the appointment for the next morning, they
took no chances and went to work.

But no, Roman couldn’t have taken Hutch’s glove; she had shown him

in and shown him out, walking along with him both times.

Guy had taken the glove. He had rushed home with his make-up still on

—which he never did—and had gone by himself to the closet. Roman must
have called him, must have said, “This man Hutch is getting suspicious
about ‘tannis root’ go home and get one of his belongings, just in case!”
And Guy had obeyed. To keep Donald Baumgart blind.

Waiting for the light at Fifty-fifth Street, she tucked her handbag and the

envelopes under her arm, unhooked the chain at the back of her neck, drew
the chain and the tannis-charm out of her dress and dropped them together
down through the sewer grating.

So much for “tannis root.” Devil’s Fungus.
She was so frightened she wanted to cry.
Because she knew what Guy was giving them in exchange for his

success.

The baby. To use in their rituals.
He had never wanted a baby until after Donald Baumgart was blind. He

didn’t like to feel it moving; he didn’t like to talk about it; he kept himself
as distant and busy as if it weren’t his baby at all.

Because he knew what they were planning to do to it as soon as he gave

it to them.

Donald Baumgart’s blindness. And how, pray tell, did Guy get one of
Donald Baumgart’s belongings for the big spell-casting? See, Idiot Girl? It
all falls apart when you pick at it.

But why had he lied about the tickets?
She undressed and took a long cool shower, turned clumsily around and

around and then pushed her face up into the spray, trying to think sensibly,
rationally.

There must be another reason why he had lied. Maybe he’d spent the

day hanging around Downey’s, yes, and had gotten the tickets from one of
the gang there; wouldn’t he then have said Dominick had given them to
him, so as not to let her know he’d been goofing off?

Of course he would have.
There, you see, Idiot Girl?
But why hadn’t he shown himself naked in so many months and

months?

She was glad, anyway, that she had thrown away that damned charm.

She should have done it long ago. She never should have taken it from
Minnie in the first place. What a pleasure it was to be rid of its revolting
smell! She dried herself and splashed on cologne, lots and lots of it.

He hadn’t shown himself naked because he had a little rash of some

kind and was embarrassed about it. Actors are vain, aren’t they?
Elementary.

But why had he thrown out the book? And spent so much time at

Minnie and Roman’s? And waited for the news of Donald Baumgart’s
blindness? And rushed home wearing his make-up just before Hutch missed
his glove?

She brushed her hair and tied it, and put on a brassiere and panties. She

went into the kitchen and drank two glasses of cold milk.

She didn’t know.
She went into the nursery, moved the bathinette away from the wall, and

thumbtacked a sheet of plastic over the wallpaper to protect it when the
baby splashed in its bath.

She didn’t know.
She didn’t know if she was going mad or going sane, if witches had

only the longing for power or power that was real and strong, if Guy was
her loving husband or the treacherous enemy of the baby and herself.

It was almost four. He would be home in an hour or so.

The phone was answered on the first ring with a quick impatient “Yeh?”
“Is this Donald Baumgart?”
“That’s right.”
“This is Rosemary Woodhouse,” she said. “Guy Woodhouse’s wife.”
“Oh?”
“I wanted—”
“My God,” he said, “you must be a happy little lady these days! I hear

you’re living in baronial splendor in the ‘Bram,’ sipping vintage wine from
crystal goblets, with scores of uniformed lackeys in attendance.”

She said, “I wanted to know how you are; if there’s been any

improvement.”

He laughed. “Why bless your heart, Guy Woodhouse’s wife,” he said,

“I’m fine! I’m splendid! There’s been enormous improvement! I only broke
six glasses today, only fell down three flights of stairs, and only went tap-a-
tap-tapping in front of two speeding fire engines! Every day in every way
I’m getting better and better and better and better.”

Rosemary said, “Guy and I are both very unhappy that he got his break

because of your misfortune.”

Donald Baumgart was silent for a moment, and then said, “Oh, what the

hell. That’s the way it goes. Somebody’s up, somebody’s down. He
would’ve made out all right anyway. To tell you the truth, after that second
audition we did for Two Hours of Solid Crap, I was dead certain he was
going to get the part. He was terrific.”

“He thought you were going to get it,” Rosemary said. “And he was

right.”

“Briefly.”
“I’m sorry I didn’t come along that day he came to visit you,”

Rosemary said. “He asked me to, but I couldn’t.”

“Visit me? You mean the day we met for drinks?”
“Yes,” she said. “That’s what I meant.”

they? No, after four they do, that’s right; and it was after four. That was
awfully good-natured of Guy. Most people wouldn’t have had the—well,
class, I guess. I wouldn’t have had it, I can tell you that.”

“The loser buying the winner a drink,” Rosemary said.
“And little did we know that a week later—less than a week, in fact—”
“That’s right,” Rosemary said. “It was only a few days before you—”
“Went blind. Yes. It was a Wednesday or Thursday, because I’d been to

a matinee—Wednesday, I think—and the following Sunday was when it
happened. Hey”—he laughed—“Guy didn’t put anything in that drink, did
he?”

“No, he didn’t,” Rosemary said. Her voice was shaking. “By the way,”

she said, “he has something of yours, you know.”

“What do you mean?”
“Don’t you know?”
“No,” he said.
“Didn’t you miss anything that day?”
“No. Not that I remember.”
“You’re sure?”
“You don’t mean my tie, do you?”
“Yes,” she said.
“Well he’s got mine and I’ve got his. Does he want his back? He can

have it; it doesn’t matter to me what tie I’m wearing, or if I’m wearing one
at all.”

“No, he doesn’t want it back,” Rosemary said. “I didn’t understand. I

thought he had only borrowed it.”

“No, it was a trade. It sounded as if you thought he had stolen it.”
“I have to hang up now,” Rosemary said. “I just wanted to know if there

was any improvement.”

“No, there isn’t. It was nice of you to call.”
She hung up.
It was nine minutes after four.
She put on her girdle and a dress and sandals. She took the emergency

money Guy kept under his underwear—a not very thick fold of bills—and
put it into her handbag, put in her address book too and the bottle of vitamin
capsules. A contraction came and went, the second of the day. She took the

suitcase that stood by the bedroom door and went down the hallway and out
of the apartment.

Halfway to the elevator, she turned and doubled back.
She rode down in the service elevator with two delivery boys.
On Fifty-fifth Street she got a taxi.

“No,” Rosemary said, “but I have to see the doctor. It’s very important.”
Miss Lark glanced at her watch. “He has to leave at five,” she said, “and

there’s Mrs. Byron…”—she looked over at a woman who sat reading and
then smiled at Rosemary—“but I’m sure he’ll see you. Sit down. I’ll let him
know you’re here as soon as he’s free.”

“Thank you,” Rosemary said.
She put the suitcase by the nearest chair and sat down. The handbag’s

white patent was damp in her hands. She opened it, took out a tissue, and
wiped her palms and then her upper lip and temples. Her heart was racing.

“How is it out there?” Miss Lark asked.
“Terrible,” Rosemary said. “Ninety-four.”
Miss Lark made a pained sound.
A woman came out of Dr. Sapirstein’s office, a woman in her fifth or

sixth month whom Rosemary had seen before. They nodded at each other.
Miss Lark went in.

“You’re due any day now, aren’t you?” the woman said, waiting by the

desk.

“Tuesday,” Rosemary said.
“Good luck,” the woman said. “You’re smart to get it over with before

July and August.”

Miss Lark came out again. “Mrs. Byron,” she said, and to Rosemary,

“He’ll see you right after.”

“Thank you,” Rosemary said.
Mrs. Byron went into Dr. Sapirstein’s office and closed the door. The

woman by the desk conferred with Miss Lark about another appointment
and then went out, saying good-by to Rosemary and wishing her luck again.

elbow. Is God Dead? it asked in red letters on a black background. She
found the index and turned to Show Business. There was a piece on Barbra
Streisand. She tried to read it.

“That smells nice,” Miss Lark said, sniffing in Rosemary’s direction.

“What is it?”

“It’s called ‘Detchema,’” Rosemary said.
“It’s a big improvement over your regular, if you don’t mind my

saying.”

“That wasn’t a cologne,” Rosemary said. “It was a good luck charm. I

threw it away.”

“Good,” Miss Lark said. “Maybe the doctor will follow your example.”
Rosemary, after a moment, said, “Dr. Sapirstein?”
Miss Lark said, “Mm-hmm. He has the after-shave. But it isn’t, is it?

Then he has a good luck charm. Only he isn’t superstitious. I don’t think he
is. Anyway, he has the same smell once in a while, whatever it is, and when
he does, I can’t come within five feet of him. Much stronger than yours
was. Haven’t you ever noticed?”

“No,” Rosemary said.
“I guess you haven’t been here on the right days,” Miss Lark said. “Or

maybe you thought it was your own you were smelling. What is it, a
chemical thing?”

Rosemary stood up and put down Time and picked up her suitcase. “My

husband is outside; I have to tell him something,” she said. “I’ll be back in a
minute.”

“You can leave your suitcase,” Miss Lark said.
Rosemary took it with her though.

CHAPTER 10

A service answered. Rosemary gave her name and the phone number.

“Please ask him to call me back right away,” she said. “It’s an emergency
and I’m in a phone booth.”

“All right,” the woman said and clicked to silence.
Rosemary hung up and then lifted the receiver again but kept a hidden

finger on the hook. She held the receiver to her ear as if listening, so that no
one should come along and ask her to give up the phone. The baby kicked
and twisted in her. She was sweating. Quickly, please, Dr. Hill. Call me.
Rescue me.

All of them. All of them. They were all in it together. Guy, Dr.

Sapirstein, Minnie, and Roman. All of them witches. All Of Them Witches.
Using her to produce a baby for them, so that they could take it and—Don’t
you worry, Andy-or-Jenny, I’ll kill them before I let them touch you!

The phone rang. She jumped her finger from the hook. “Yes?”
“Is this Mrs. Woodhouse?” It was the service again.
“Where’s Dr. Hill?” she said.
“Did I get the name right?” the woman asked. “Is it ‘Rosemary

Woodhouse’?”

“Yes!”
“And you’re Dr. Hill’s patient?”

She explained about the one visit back in the fall. “Please, please,” she

said, “he has to speak to me! It’s important! It’s—please. Please tell him to
call me.”

“All right,” the woman said.
Holding the hook again, Rosemary wiped her forehead with the back of

her hand. Please, Dr. Hill. She cracked open the door for air and then
pushed it closed again as a woman came near and waited. “Oh, I didn’t
know that,” Rosemary said to the mouthpiece, her finger on the hook.
“Really? What else did he say?” Sweat trickled down her back and from
under her arms. The baby turned and rolled.

It had been a mistake to use a phone so near Dr. Sapirstein’s office. She

should have gone to Madison or Lexington. “That’s wonderful,” she said.
“Did he say anything else?” At this very moment he might be out of the
door and looking for her, and wouldn’t the nearest phone booth be the first
place he’d look? She should have gotten right into a taxi, gotten far away.
She put her back as much as she could in the direction he would come from
if he came. The woman outside was walking away, thank God.

And now, too, Guy would be coming home. He would see the suitcase

gone and call Dr. Sapirstein, thinking she was in the hospital. Soon the two
of them would be looking for her. And all the others too; the Weeses, the—

“Yes?”—stopping the ring in its middle.
“Mrs. Woodhouse?”
It was Dr. Hill, Dr. Savior-Rescuer-Kildare-Wonderful-Hill. “Thank

you,” she said. “Thank you for calling me.”

“I thought you were in California,” he said.
“No,” she said. “I went to another doctor, one some friends sent me to,

and he isn’t good, Dr. Hill; he’s been lying to me and giving me unusual
kinds of—drinks and capsules. The baby is due on Tuesday—remember,
you told me, June twenty-eighth?—and I want you to deliver it. I’ll pay you
whatever you want, the same as if I’d been coming to you all along.”

“Mrs. Woodhouse—”
“Please, let me talk to you,” she said, hearing refusal. “Let me come and

explain what’s been going on. I can’t stay too long where I am right now.
My husband and this doctor and the people who sent me to him, they’ve all
been involved in—well, in a plot; I know that sounds crazy, Doctor, and
you’re probably thinking, ‘My God, this poor girl has completely flipped,’

but I haven’t flipped, Doctor, I swear by all the saints I haven’t. Now and
then there are plots against people, aren’t there?”

“Yes, I suppose there are,” he said.
“There’s one against me and my baby,” she said, “and if you’ll let me

come talk to you I’ll tell you about it. And I’m not going to ask you to do
anything unusual or wrong or anything; all I want you to do is get me into a
hospital and deliver my baby for me.”

He said, “Come to my office tomorrow after—”
“Now,” she said. “Now. Right now. They’re going to be looking for

me.”

“Mrs. Woodhouse,” he said, “I’m not at my office now, I’m home. I’ve

been up since yesterday morning and—”

“I beg you,” she said. “I beg you.”
He was silent.
She said, “I’ll come there and explain to you. I can’t stay here.”
“My office at eight o’clock,” he said. “Will that be all right?”
“Yes,” she said. “Yes. Thank you. Dr. Hill?”
“Yes?”
“My husband may call you and ask if I called.”
“I’m not going to speak to anyone,” he said. “I’m going to take a nap.”
“Would you tell your service? Not to say that I called? Doctor?”
“All right, I will,” he said.
“Thank you,” she said.
“Eight o’clock.”
“Yes. Thank you.”
A man with his back to the booth turned as she came out; he wasn’t Dr.

Sapirstein though, he was somebody else.

back with her suitcase and sat in a different seat. The baby was quiet,
sleeping. The movie changed to something with Keenan Wynn.

At twenty of eight she left the theater and took a taxi to Dr. Hill’s office

on West Seventy-second Street. It would be safe to go in, she thought; they
would be watching Joan’s place and Hugh and Elise’s, but not Dr. Hill’s
office at eight o’clock, not if his service had said she hadn’t called. To be
sure, though, she asked the driver to wait and watch until she was inside the
door.

Nobody stopped her. Dr. Hill opened the door himself, more pleasantly

than she had expected after his reluctance on the telephone. He had grown a
moustache, blond and hardly noticeable, but he still looked like Dr. Kildare.
He was wearing a blue-and-yellow-plaid sport shirt.

They went into his consulting room, which was a quarter the size of Dr.

Sapirstein’s, and there Rosemary told him her story. She sat with her hands
on the chair arms and her ankles crossed and spoke quietly and calmly,
knowing that any suggestion of hysteria would make him disbelieve her and
think her mad. She told him about Adrian Marcato and Minnie and Roman;
about the months of pain she had suffered and the herbal drinks and the
little white cakes; about Hutch and All Of Them Witches and the Fantasticks
tickets and black candles and Donald Baumgart’s necktie. She tried to keep
everything coherent and in sequence but she couldn’t. She got it all out
without getting hysterical though; Dr. Shand’s recorder and Guy throwing
away the book and Miss Lark’s final unwitting revelation.

“Maybe the coma and the blindness were only coincidences,” she said,

“or maybe they do have some kind of ESP way of hurting people. But that’s
not important. The important thing is that they want the baby. I’m sure they
do.”

“It certainly seems that way,” Dr. Hill said, “especially in light of the

interest they’ve taken in it right from the beginning.”

Rosemary shut her eyes and could have cried. He believed her. He

didn’t think she was mad. She opened her eyes and looked at him, staying
calm and composed. He was writing. Did all his patients love him? Her
palms were wet; she slid them from the chair arms and pressed them against
her dress.

“The doctor’s name is Shand, you say,” Dr. Hill said.

“No, Dr. Shand is just one of the group,” Rosemary said. “One of the

coven. The doctor is Dr. Sapirstein.”

“Abraham Sapirstein?”
“Yes,” Rosemary said uneasily. “Do you know him?”
“I’ve met him once or twice,” Dr. Hill said, writing more.
“Looking at him,” Rosemary said, “or even talking to him, you would

never think he—”

“Never in a million years,” Dr. Hill said, putting down his pen, “which

is why we’re told not to judge books by their covers. Would you like to go
into Mount Sinai right now, this evening?”

Rosemary smiled. “I would love to,” she said. “Is it possible?”
“It’ll take some wire-pulling and arguing,” Dr. Hill said. He rose and

went to the open door of his examining room. “I want you to lie down and
get some rest,” he said, reaching into the darkened room behind him. It
blinked into ice-blue fluorescent light. “I’ll see what I can do and then I’ll
check you over.”

Rosemary hefted herself up and went with her handbag into the

examining room. “Anything they’ve got,” she said. “Even a broom closet.”

“I’m sure we can do better than that,” Dr. Hill said. He came in after her

and turned on an air conditioner in the room’s blue-curtained window. It
was a noisy one.

“Shall I undress?” Rosemary asked.
“No, not yet,” Dr. Hill said. “This is going to take a good half-hour of

high-powered telephoning. Just lie down and rest.” He went out and closed
the door.

Rosemary went to the day bed at the far end of the room and sat down

heavily on its blue-covered softness. She put her handbag on a chair.

God bless Dr. Hill.
She would make a sampler to that effect some day.
She shook off her sandals and lay back gratefully. The air conditioner

sent a small stream of coolness to her; the baby turned over slowly and
lazily, as if feeling it.

Everything’s okay now, Andy-or-Jenny. We’re going to be in a nice clean

bed at Mount Sinai Hospital, with no visitors and—

Money. She sat up, opened her handbag, and found Guy’s money that

she had taken. There was a hundred and eighty dollars. Plus sixteen-and-

change of her own. It would be enough, certainly, for any advance
payments that had to be made, and if more were needed Brian would wire it
or Hugh and Elise would lend it to her. Or Joan. Or Grace Cardiff. She had
plenty of people she could turn to.

She took the capsules out, put the money back in, and closed the

handbag; and then she lay back again on the day bed, with the handbag and
the bottle of capsules on the chair beside her. She would give the capsules
to Dr. Hill; he would analyze them and make sure there was nothing
harmful in them. There couldn’t be. They would want the baby to be
healthy, wouldn’t they, for their insane rituals?

She shivered.
The—monsters.
And Guy.
Unspeakable, unspeakable.
Her middle hardened in a straining contraction, the strongest one yet.

She breathed shallowly until it ended.

Making three that day.
She would tell Dr. Hill.

He pushed the door all the way open and withdrew. Dr. Sapirstein and

Guy came in.

Rosemary sat up, lowering her hand from her eyes.
They came and stood close to her. Guy’s face was stony and blank. He

looked at the walls, only at the walls, not at her. Dr. Sapirstein said, “Come
with us quietly, Rosemary. Don’t argue or make a scene, because if you say
anything more about witches or witchcraft we’re going to be forced to take
you to a mental hospital. The facilities there for delivering the baby will be
less than the best. You don’t want that, do you? So put your shoes on.”

“No one’s going to hurt you.”

“Or the baby,” Dr. Sapirstein said. “Put your shoes on.” He picked up

the bottle of capsules, looked at it, and put it in his pocket.

She put her sandals on and he gave her her handbag.
They went out, Dr. Sapirstein holding her arm, Guy touching her other

elbow.

Dr. Hill had her suitcase. He gave it to Guy.
“She’s fine now,” Dr. Sapirstein said. “We’re going to go home and

rest.”

Dr. Hill smiled at her. “That’s all it takes, nine times out of ten,” he said.
She looked at him and said nothing.
“Thank you for your trouble, Doctor,” Dr. Sapirstein said, and Guy said,

“It’s a shame you had to come in here and—”

“I’m glad I could be of help, sir,” Dr. Hill said to Dr. Sapirstein, opening

the front door.

Nobody spoke.
They drove to the Bramford.

The smile, reminding her of her individuality, wakened something in

her, revived something.

She snicked open her handbag at her side, worked a finger through her

key ring, and, near the elevator door, turned the handbag all the way over,
spilling out everything except the keys. Rolling lipstick, coins, Guy’s tens
and twenties fluttering, everything. She looked down stupidly.

They picked things up, Guy and Dr. Sapirstein, while she stood mute,

pregnant-helpless. Diego came out of the elevator, making tongue-teeth

sounds of concern. He bent and helped. She backed in to get out of the way
and, watching them, toed the big round floor button. The rolling door
rolled. She pulled closed the inner gate.

Diego grabbed for the door but saved his fingers; smacked on the

outside of it. “Hey, Mrs. Woodhouse!”

Sorry, Diego.
She pushed the handle and the car lurched upward.
She would call Brian. Or Joan or Elise or Grace Cardiff. Someone.
We’re not through yet, Andy!
She stopped the car at nine, then at six, then halfway past seven, and

then close enough to seven to open the gate and the door and step four
inches down.

She walked through the turns of hallway as quickly as she could. A

contraction came but she marched right through it, paying no heed.

The service elevator’s indicator blinked from four to five and she knew

it was Guy and Dr. Sapirstein coming up to intercept her.

So of course the key wouldn’t go into the lock.
But finally did, and she was inside, slamming the door as the elevator

door opened, hooking in the chain as Guy’s key went into the lock. She
turned the bolt and the key turned it right back again. The door opened and
pushed in against the chain.

“Open up, Ro,” Guy said.
“Go to hell,” she said.
“I’m not going to hurt you, honey.”
“You promised them the baby. Get away.”
“I didn’t promise them anything,” he said. “What are you talking about?

Promised who?”

“Rosemary,” Dr. Sapirstein said.
“You too. Get away.”
“You seem to have imagined some sort of conspiracy against you.”
“Get away,” she said, and pushed the door shut and bolted it.
It stayed bolted.
She backed away, watching it, and then went into the bedroom.
It was nine-thirty.
She wasn’t sure of Brian’s number and her address book was in the

lobby or Guy’s pocket, so the operator had to get Omaha Information.

When the call was finally put through there was still no answer. “Do you
want me to try again in twenty minutes?” the operator asked.

“Yes, please,” Rosemary said; “in five minutes.”
“I can’t try again in five minutes,” the operator said, “but I’ll try in

twenty minutes if you want me to.”

“Yes, please,” Rosemary said and hung up.
She called Joan, and Joan was out too.
Elise and Hugh’s number was—she didn’t know. Information took

forever to answer but, having answered, supplied it quickly. She dialed it
and got an answering service. They were away for the weekend. “Are they
anywhere where I can reach them? This is an emergency.”

“Is this Mr. Dunstan’s secretary?”
“No, I’m a close friend. It’s very important that I speak to them.”
“They’re on Fire Island,” the woman said. “I can give you a number.”
“Please.”
She memorized it, hung up, and was about to dial it when she heard

whispers outside the doorway and footsteps on the vinyl floor. She stood
up.

Guy and Mr. Fountain came into the room—“Honey, we’re not going to

hurt you,” Guy said—and behind them Dr. Sapirstein with a loaded
hypodermic, the needle up and dripping, his thumb at the plunger. And Dr.
Shand and Mrs. Fountain and Mrs. Gilmore. “We’re your friends,” Mrs.
Gilmore said, and Mrs. Fountain said, “There’s nothing to be afraid of,
Rosemary; honest and truly there isn’t.”

“This is nothing but a mild sedative,” Dr. Sapirstein said. “To calm you

down so that you can get a good night’s sleep.”

She was between the bed and the wall, and too gross to climb over the

bed and evade them.

They came toward her—“You know I wouldn’t let anyone hurt you,

Ro”—and she picked up the phone and struck with the receiver at Guy’s
head. He caught her wrist and Mr. Fountain caught her other arm and the
phone fell as he pulled her around with startling strength. “Help me,
somebod—” she screamed, and a handkerchief or something was jammed
into her mouth and held there by a small strong hand.

They dragged her away from the bed so Dr. Sapirstein could come in

more grueling than any of the others clamped her middle and clenched shut
her eyes. She held her breath, then sucked air in through her nostrils in
quick little pulls. A hand felt her belly, deft all-over finger-tipping, and Dr.
Sapirstein said, “Wait a minute, wait a minute now; we happen to be in
labor here.”

Silence; and someone outside the room whispered the news: “She’s in

labor!”

She opened her eyes and stared at Dr. Sapirstein, dragging air through

her nostrils, her middle relaxing. He nodded to her, and suddenly took her
arm that Mr. Fountain was holding, touched it with cotton, and stabbed it
with the needle.

She took the injection without trying to move, too afraid, too stunned.
He withdrew the needle and rubbed the spot with his thumb and then

with the cotton.

The women, she saw, were turning down the bed.
Here?
Here?
It was supposed to be Doctors Hospital! Doctors Hospital, with

equipment and nurses and everything clean and sterile!

They held her while she struggled, Guy saying in her ear, “You’ll be all

right, honey, I swear to God you will! I swear to God you’re going to be
perfectly all right! Don’t go on fighting like this, Ro, please don’t! I give
you my absolute word of honor you’re going to be perfectly all right!”

And then there was another contraction.
And then she was on the bed, with Dr. Sapirstein giving her another

injection.

And Mrs. Gilmore wiped her forehead.
And the phone rang.
And Guy said, “No, just cancel it, operator.”
And there was another contraction, faint and disconnected from her

floating eggshell head.

All the exercises had been for nothing. All wasted energy. This wasn’t

natural childbirth at all; she wasn’t helping, she wasn’t seeing.

Oh, Andy, Andy-or-Jenny! I’m sorry, my little darling! Forgive me!

PART 3

The ceiling.
And pain between her legs.
And Guy. Sitting beside the bed, watching her with an anxious,

uncertain smile.

“Hi,” he said.
“Hi,” she said back.
The pain was terrible.
And then she remembered. It was over. It was over. The baby was born.
“Is it all right?” she asked.
“Yes, fine,” he said.
“What is it?”
“A boy.”
“Really? A boy?”
He nodded.
“And it’s all right?”
“Yes.”
She let her eyes close, then managed to open them again.
“Did you call Tiffany’s?” she asked.
“Yes,” he said.
She let her eyes close and slept.

 
Later she remembered more. Laura-Louise was sitting by the bed reading
the Reader’s Digest with a magnifying glass.

“Where is it?” she asked.
Laura-Louise jumped. “My goodness, dear,” she said, the magnifying

glass at her bosom showing red ropes interwoven, “what a start you gave
me, waking up so suddenly! My goodness!” She closed her eyes and
breathed deeply.

“The baby; where is it?” she asked.
“You just wait here a minute,” Laura-Louise said, getting up with the

Digest closed on a finger. “I’ll get Guy and Doctor Abe. They’re right in the
kitchen.”

“Where’s the baby?” she asked, but Laura-Louise went out the door

without answering.

She tried to get up but fell back, her arms boneless. And there was pain

between her legs like a bundle of knife points. She lay and waited,
remembering, remembering.

It was night. Five after nine, the clock said.
They came in, Guy and Dr. Sapirstein, looking grave and resolute.
“Where’s the baby?” she asked them.
Guy came around to the side of the bed and crouched down and took

her hand. “Honey,” he said.

“Where is it?”
“Honey…” He tried to say more and couldn’t. He looked across the bed

for help.

Dr. Sapirstein stood looking down at her. A shred of coconut was caught

in his moustache. “There were complications, Rosemary,” he said, “but
nothing that will affect future births.”

“It’s—”
“Dead,” he said.
She stared at him.
He nodded.
She turned to Guy.
He nodded too.
“It was in the wrong position,” Dr. Sapirstein said. “In the hospital I

might have been able to do something, but there simply wasn’t time to get

you there. Trying anything here would have been—too dangerous for you.”

Guy said, “We can have others, honey, and we will, just as soon as

you’re better. I promise you.”

Dr. Sapirstein said, “Absolutely. You can start on another in a very few

months and the odds are thousands to one against anything similar
happening. It was a tragic one-in-ten-thousand mishap; the baby itself was
perfectly healthy and normal.”

Guy squeezed her hand and smiled encouragingly at her. “As soon as

you’re better,” he said.

in his moustache. “You’re lying,” she said. “I don’t believe you. You’re
both lying.”

“Honey,” Guy said.
“It didn’t die,” she said. “You took it. You’re lying. You’re witches.

You’re lying. You’re lying! You’re lying! You’re lying! You’re lying! You’re
lying!”

Guy held her shoulders to the bed and Dr. Sapirstein gave her an

injection.

She said nothing. She took a spoonful of soup.
“Listen,” he said, “I know where you got the idea that Minnie and

Roman were witches, but what made you think Abe and I had joined the
party?”

She said nothing.
“That’s stupid of me, though,” he said. “I guess prepartum whatever-it-

is doesn’t need reasons.” He took another of the triangles and bit off first
one point and then another.

She said, “Why did you trade ties with Donald Baumgart?”

“Why did I—well what has that got to do with anything?”
“You needed one of his personal belongings,” she said, “so they could

cast the spell and make him blind.”

He stared at her. “Honey,” he said, “for God’s sake what are you talking

about?”

“You know.”
“Holy mackerel,” he said. “I traded ties with him because I liked his and

didn’t like mine, and he liked mine and didn’t like his. I didn’t tell you
about it because afterwards it seemed like a slightly faggy thing to have
done and I was a little embarrassed about it.”

“Where did you get the tickets for The Fantasticks?” she asked him.
“What?”
“You said you got them from Dominick,” she said; “you didn’t.”
“Boy oh boy,” he said. “And that makes me a witch? I got them from a

girl named Norma-something that I met at an audition and had a couple of
drinks with. What did Abe do? Tie his shoelaces the wrong way?”

“He uses tannis root,” she said. “It’s a witch thing. His receptionist told

me she smelled it on him.”

“Maybe Minnie gave him a good luck charm, just the way she gave you

one. You mean only witches use it? That doesn’t sound very likely.”

Rosemary was silent.
“Let’s face it, darling,” Guy said, “you had the prepartum crazies. And

now you’re going to rest and get over them.” He leaned closer to her and
took her hand. “I know this has been the worst thing that ever happened to
you,” he said, “but from now on everything’s going to be roses. Warners is
within an inch of where we want them, and suddenly Universal is interested
too. I’m going to get some more good reviews and then we’re going to blow
this town and be in the beautiful hills of Beverly, with the pool and the
spice garden and the whole schmeer. And the kids too, Ro. Scout’s honor.
You heard what Abe said.” He kissed her hand. “Got to run now and get
famous.”

He got up and started for the door.
“Let me see your shoulder,” she said.
He stopped and turned.
“Let me see your shoulder,” she said.
“Are you kidding?”

“No,” she said. “Let me see it. Your left shoulder.”
He looked at her and said, “All right, whatever you say, honey.”
He undid the collar of his shirt, a short-sleeved blue knit, and peeled the

bottom of it up and over his head. He had a white T shirt on underneath. “I
generally prefer doing this to music,” he said, and took off the T shirt too.
He went close to the bed and, leaning, showed Rosemary his left shoulder.
It was unmarked. There was only the faint scar of a boil or pimple. He
showed her his other shoulder and his chest and his back.

“This is as far as I go without a blue light,” he said.
“All right,” she said.
He grinned. “The question now,” he said, “is do I put my shirt back on

or do I go out and give Laura-Louise the thrill of a lifetime.”

Joan and Elise and Tiger came to see her, and she spoke with Brian for

twenty minutes on the phone. Flowers came —roses and carnations and a
yellow azalea plant—from Allan, and Mike and Pedro, and Lou and
Claudia. Guy bought a new remote-control television set and put it at the
foot of the bed. She watched and ate and took pills that were given to her.

A letter of sympathy came from Minnie and Roman, a page from each

of them. They were in Dubrovnik.

The stitches gradually stopped hurting.

faraway wailing. Or was there? She slipped out of bed and turned off the air
conditioner.

Florence Gilmore came in with the pump and the cup.
“Do you hear a baby crying?” Rosemary asked her.
Both of them listened.
Yes, there it was. A baby crying.
“No, dear, I don’t,” Florence said. “Get back into bed now; you know

you’re not supposed to be walking around. Did you turn off the air
conditioner? You mustn’t do that; it’s a terrible day. People are actually
dying, it’s so hot.”

She heard it again that afternoon, and mysteriously her breasts began to

leak…

“Some new people moved in,” Guy said out of nowhere that evening.

“Up on eight.”

“And they have a baby,” she said.
“Yes. How did you know?”
She looked at him for a moment. “I heard it crying,” she said.
She heard it the next day. And the next.
She stopped watching television and held a book in front of her,

pretending to read but only listening, listening…

It wasn’t up on eight; it was right there on seven.
And more often than not, the pump and the cup were brought to her a

few minutes after the crying began; and the crying stopped a few minutes
after her milk was taken away.

“What do you do with it?” she asked Laura-Louise one morning, giving

her back the pump and the cup and six ounces of milk.

“Why, throw it away, of course,” Laura-Louise said, and went out.
That afternoon, as she gave Laura-Louise the cup, she said, “Wait a

minute,” and started to put a used coffee spoon into it.

Laura-Louise jerked the cup away. “Don’t do that,” she said, and caught

the spoon in a finger of the hand holding the pump.

“What difference does it make?” Rosemary asked.
“It’s just messy, that’s all,” Laura-Louise said.

It was in Minnie and Roman’s apartment.
They were keeping it there, feeding it her milk and please God taking

care of it, because, as well as she remembered from Hutch’s book, August
first was one of their special days, Lammas or Leamas, with special
maniacal rituals. Or maybe they were keeping it until Minnie and Roman
came back from Europe. For their share.

But it was still alive.
She stopped taking the pills they gave her. She tucked them down into

the fold between her thumb and her palm and faked the swallowing, and
later pushed the pills as far as she could between the mattress and the box
spring beneath it.

She felt stronger and more wide-awake.
Hang on, Andy! I’m coming!
She had learned her lesson with Dr. Hill. This time she would turn to no

one, would expect no one to believe her and be her savior. Not the police,
not Joan or the Dunstans or Grace Cardiff, not even Brian. Guy was too
good an actor, Dr. Sapirstein too famous a doctor; between the two of them
they’d have even him, even Brian, thinking she had some kind of post-
losing-the-baby madness. This time she would do it alone, would go in
there and get him herself, with her longest sharpest kitchen knife to fend
away those maniacs.

she knew—that there was a secret way from the one apartment to the other.
The door had been chained that night—she knew that as she knew the hand
she was looking at was a hand, not a bird or a battleship—and still they had
all come pouring in. So there had to be another way.

Which could only be the linen closet, barricaded by dead Mrs.

Gardenia, who surely had died of the same witchery that had frozen and
killed poor Hutch. The closet had been put there to break the one big
apartment into two smaller ones, and if Mrs. Gardenia had belonged to the
coven—she’d given Minnie her herbs; hadn’t Terry said so?—then what
was more logical than to open the back of the closet in some way and go to
and fro with so many steps saved and the Bruhns and Dubin-and-DeVore
never knowing of the traffic?

It was the linen closet.
In a dream long ago she had been carried through it. That had been no

dream; it had been a sign from heaven, a divine message to be stored away
and remembered now for assurance in a time of trial.

Oh Father in heaven, forgive me for doubting! Forgive me for turning

from you, Merciful Father, and help me, help me in my hour of need! Oh
Jesus, dear Jesus, help me save my innocent baby!

She pretended still to be limp and docile; ate her meals and looked at

magazines and pumped out her milk.

It was Leah Fountain who was there when everything was right. She

came in after Helen Wees had gone out with the milk and said, “Hi,
Rosemary! I’ve been letting the other girls have the fun of visiting with

you, but now I’m going to take a turn. You’re in a regular movie theater
here! Is there anything good on tonight?”

Nobody else was in the apartment. Guy had gone to meet Allan and

have some contracts explained to him.

They watched a Fred Astaire-Ginger Rogers picture, and during a break

Leah went into the kitchen and brought back two cups of coffee. “I’m a
little hungry too,” Rosemary said when Leah had put the cups on the night
table. “Would you mind very much fixing me a cheese sandwich?”

“Of course I wouldn’t mind, dear,” Leah said. “How do you like it, with

lettuce and mayonnaise?”

She went out again and Rosemary got the fold of magazine cover from

her tissue box. There were eleven pills in it now. She slid them all into
Leah’s cup and stirred the coffee with her own spoon, which she then wiped
off with a tissue. She picked up her own coffee, but it shook so much that
she had to put it down again.

She was sitting and sipping calmly though when Leah came in with the

sandwich. “Thanks, Leah,” she said, “that looks great. The coffee’s a little
bitter; I guess it was sitting too long.”

“Shall I make fresh?” Leah asked.
“No, it’s not that bad,” Rosemary said.
Leah sat down beside the bed, took her cup, and stirred it and tasted.

“Mm,” she said and wrinkled her nose; she nodded, agreeing with
Rosemary.

“It’s drinkable though,” Rosemary said.
They watched the movie, and after two more breaks Leah’s head

drooped and snapped up sharply. She put down her cup and saucer, the cup
two-thirds empty. Rosemary ate the last piece of her sandwich and watched
Fred Astaire and two other people dancing on turntables in a glossy unreal
fun house.

During the next section of the movie Leah fell asleep.
“Leah?” Rosemary said.
The elderly woman sat snoring, her chin to her chest, her hands palm-

upward in her lap. Her lavender-tinted hair, a wig, had slipped forward;
sparse white hairs stuck out at the back of her neck.

Rosemary got out of bed, slid her feet into slippers, and put on the blue-

and-white quilted housecoat she had bought for the hospital. Going quietly

out of the bedroom, she closed the door almost all the way and went to the
front door of the apartment and quietly chained and bolted it.

She then went into the kitchen and, from her knife rack, took the longest

sharpest knife—a nearly new carving knife with a curved and pointed steel
blade and a heavy bone handle with a brass butt. Holding it point-down at
her side, she left the kitchen and went down the hallway to the linen-closet
door.

As soon as she opened it she knew she was right. The shelves looked

neat and orderly enough, but the contents of two of them had been
interchanged; the bath towels and hand towels were where the winter
blankets ought to have been and vice versa.

She laid the knife on the bathroom threshold and took everything out of

the closet except what was on the fixed top shelf. She put towels and linens
on the floor, and large and small boxes, and then lifted out the four
gingham-covered shelves she had decorated and placed there a thousand
thousand years ago.

The back of the closet, below the top shelf, was a single large white-

painted panel framed with narrow white molding. Standing close and
leaning aside for better light, Rosemary saw that where the panel and the
molding met, the paint was broken in a continuous line. She pressed at one
side of the panel and then at the other; pressed harder, and it swung inward
on scraping hinges. Within was darkness; another closet, with a wire hanger
glinting on the floor and one bright spot of light, a keyhole. Pushing the
panel all the way open, Rosemary stepped into the second closet and
ducked down. Through the keyhole she saw, at a distance of about twenty
feet, a small curio cabinet that stood at a jog in the hallway of Minnie and
Roman’s apartment.

She tried the door. It opened.
She closed it and backed out through her own closet and got the knife;

then went in and through again, looked out again through the keyhole, and
opened the door just the least bit.

Then opened it wide, holding the knife shoulder-high, point forward.
The hallway was empty, but there were distant voices from the living

room. The bathroom was on her right, its door open, dark. Minnie and
Roman’s bedroom was on the left, with a bedside lamp burning. There was
no crib, no baby.

another, on the left, was a linen closet.

Over the curio cabinet hung a small but vivid oil painting of a church in

flames. Before, there had been only a clean space and a hook; now there
was this shocking painting. St. Patrick’s, it looked like, with yellow and
orange flames bursting from its windows and soaring through its gutted
roof.

Where had she seen it? A church burning…
In the dream. The one where they had carried her through the linen

closet. Guy and somebody else. “You’ve got her too high.” To a ballroom
where a church was burning. Where that church was burning.

But how could it be?
Had she really been carried through the closet, seen the painting as they

carried her past it?

Find Andy. Find Andy. Find Andy.
Knife high, she followed the jog to the left and the right. Other doors

were locked. There was another painting; nude men and women dancing in
a circle. Ahead were the foyer and the front door, the archway on the right
to the living room. The voices were louder. “Not if he’s still waiting for a
plane, he isn’t!” Mr. Fountain said, and there was laughter and then
hushing.

In the dream ballroom Jackie Kennedy had spoken kindly to her and

gone away, and then all of them had been there, the whole coven, naked and
singing in a circle around her. Had it been a real thing that had really
happened? Roman in a black robe had drawn designs on her. Dr. Sapirstein
had held a cup of red paint for him. Red paint? Blood?

‘Pulling my leg’ is what we say over here.”

Minnie? Back from Europe? And Roman too? But only yesterday there

had been a card from Dubrovnik saying they were staying on!

Had they ever really been away?
She was at the archway now, could see the bookshelves and file cabinets

and bridge tables laden with newspapers and stacked envelopes. The coven
was at the other end, laughing, talking softly. Ice cubes clinked.

She bettered her grip on the knife and moved a step forward. She

stopped, staring.

Black and only black it was; skirted with black taffeta, hooded and flounced
with black organza. A silver ornament turned on a black ribbon pinned to its
black hood.

Dead? But no, even as she feared it, the stiff organza trembled, the

silver ornament quivered.

He was in there. In that monstrous perverted witches’ bassinet.
The silver ornament was a crucifix hanging upside down, with the black

ribbon wound and knotted around Jesus’ ankles.

The thought of her baby lying helpless amid sacrilege and horror

brought tears to Rosemary’s eyes, and suddenly a longing dragged at her to
do nothing but collapse and weep, to surrender completely before such
elaborate and unspeakable evil. She withstood it though; she shut her eyes
tight to stop the tears, said a quick Hail Mary, and drew together all her
resolve and all her hatred too; hatred of Minnie, Roman, Guy, Dr. Sapirstein
—of all of them who had conspired to steal Andy away from her and make
their loathsome uses of him. She wiped her hands on her housecoat, threw
back her hair, found a fresh grip on the knife’s thick handle, and stepped out
where they could every one of them see her and know she had come.

Insanely, they didn’t. They went right on talking, listening, sipping,

pleasantly partying, as if she were a ghost, or back in her bed dreaming;
Minnie, Roman, Guy (contracts!), Mr. Fountain, the Weeses, Laura-Louise,
and a studious-looking young Japanese with eyeglasses—all gathered under
an over-the-mantel portrait of Adrian Marcato. He alone saw her. He stood
glaring at her, motionless, powerful; but powerless, a painting.

Then Roman saw her too; put down his drink and touched Minnie’s

arm. Silence sprang up, and those who sat with their backs toward her
turned around questioningly. Guy started to rise but sat down again. Laura-
Louise clapped her hands to her mouth and began squealing. Helen Wees
said, “Get back in bed, Rosemary; you know you aren’t supposed to be up
and around.” Either mad or trying psychology.

“Is the mother?” the Japanese asked, and when Roman nodded, said

“Ah, sssssssssssss,” and looked at Rosemary with interest.

“She killed Leah,” Mr. Fountain said, standing up. “She killed my Leah.

Did you? Where is she? Did you kill my Leah?”

Rosemary stared at them, at Guy. He looked down, red-faced.

She gripped the knife tighter. “Yes,” she said, “I killed her. I stabbed her

to death. And I cleaned my knife and I’ll stab to death whoever comes near
me. Tell them how sharp it is, Guy!”

He said nothing. Mr. Fountain sat down, a hand to his heart. Laura-

Louise squealed.

Watching them, she started across the room toward the bassinet.
“Rosemary,” Roman said.
“Shut up,” she said.
“Before you look at—”
“Shut up,” she said. “You’re in Dubrovnik. I don’t hear you.”
“Let her,” Minnie said.
She watched them until she was by the bassinet, which was angled in

their direction. With her free hand she caught the black-covered handle at
the foot of it and swung the bassinet slowly, gently, around to face her.
Taffeta rustled; the back wheels squeaked.

black blanket with little black mitts ribbon-tied around his wrists. Orange-
red hair he had, a surprising amount of it, silky-clean and brushed. Andy!
Oh, Andy! She reached out to him, her knife turning away; his lips pouted
and he opened his eyes and looked at her. His eyes were golden-yellow, all
golden-yellow, with neither whites nor irises; all golden-yellow, with
vertical black-slit pupils.

She looked at him.
He looked at her, golden-yellowly, and then at the swaying upside-down

crucifix.

She looked at them watching her and knife-in-hand screamed at them,

“What have you done to his eyes?”

They stirred and looked to Roman.
“He has His Father’s eyes,” he said.
She looked at him, looked at Guy—whose eyes were hidden behind a

hand—looked at Roman again. “What are you talking about?” she said.
“Guy’s eyes are brown, they’re normal! What have you done to him, you
maniacs?” She moved from the bassinet, ready to kill them.

“Satan is His Father, not Guy,” Roman said. “Satan is His Father, who

came up from Hell and begat a Son of mortal woman! To avenge the

iniquities visited by the God worshipers upon His never-doubting
followers!”

“Hail Satan,” Mr. Wees said.
“Satan is His Father and His name is Adrian!” Roman cried, his voice

growing louder and prouder, his bearing more strong and forceful. “He shall
overthrow the mighty and lay waste their temples! He shall redeem the
despised and wreak vengeance in the name of the burned and the tortured!”

“Hail Adrian,” they said. “Hail Adrian.” “Hail Adrian.” And “Hail

Satan.” “Hail Satan.” “Hail Adrian.” “Hail Satan.”

She shook her head. “No,” she said.
Minnie said, “He chose you out of all the world, Rosemary. Out of all

the women in the whole world, He chose you. He brought you and Guy to
your apartment there, He made that foolish what’s-her-name, Terry, made
her get all scared and silly so we had to change our plans, He arranged
everything that had to be arranged, cause He wanted you to be the mother
of His only living Son.”

“His power is stronger than stronger,” Roman said.
“Hail Satan,” Helen Wees said.
“His might will last longer than longer.”
“Hair Satan,” the Japanese said.
Laura-Louise uncovered her mouth. Guy looked out at Rosemary from

under his hand.

“No,” she said, “no,” the knife hanging at her side. “No. It can’t be.

No.”

“Go look at His hands,” Minnie said. “And His feet.”
“And His tail,” Laura-Louise said.
“And the buds of His horns,” Minnie said.
“Oh God,” Rosemary said.
“God’s dead,” Roman said.
She turned to the bassinet, let fall the knife, turned back to the watching

coven. “Oh God!” she said and covered her face. “Oh God!” And raised her
fists and screamed to the ceiling: “Oh God! Oh God! Oh God! Oh God! Oh
God!”

“God is DEAD!” Roman thundered. “God is dead and Satan lives! The

year is One, the first year of our Lord! The year is One, God is done! The
year is One, Adrian’s begun!”

“Hail Satan!” they cried. “Hail Adrian!” “Hail Adrian!” “Hail Satan!”
She backed away—“No, no”—backed farther and farther away until she

was between two bridge tables. A chair was behind her; she sat down on it
and stared at them. “No.”

Minnie went over and, grunting as she stooped, picked up the knife. She

took it out to the kitchen.

Laura-Louise went to the bassinet and rocked it possessively, making

faces into it. The black taffeta rustled; the wheels squeaked.

She sat there and stared. “No,” she said.
The dream. The dream. It had been true. The yellow eyes she had

looked up into. “Oh God,” she said.

Roman came over to her. “Clare is just putting on,” he said, “holding his

heart that way over Leah. He’s not that sorry. Nobody really liked her; she
was stingy, emotionally as well as financially. Why don’t you help us out,
Rosemary, be a real mother to Adrian; and we’ll fix it so you don’t get
punished for killing her. So that nobody ever even finds out about it. You
don’t have to join if you don’t want to; just be a mother to your baby.” He
bent over and whispered: “Minnie and Laura-Louise are too old. It’s not
right.”

She looked at him.
He stood straight again. “Think about it, Rosemary,” he said.
“I didn’t kill her,” she said.
“Oh?”
“I just gave her pills,” she said. “She’s asleep.”
“Oh,” he said.
The doorbell rang.
“Excuse me,” he said, and went to answer it. “Think about it anyway,”

he said over his shoulder.

“Oh God,” she said.
“Shut up with your Oh God’s’ or we’ll kill you,” Laura-Louise said,

rocking the bassinet. “Milk or no milk.”

dampened handkerchief in her hand. “Rosemary is His mother, no matter
how she behaves,” she said. “You remember that, and show some respect.”

Laura-Louise said something under her breath.
Rosemary wiped her forehead and cheeks with the cool handkerchief.

The Japanese, sitting across the room on a hassock, caught her eye and
grinned and ducked his head. He held up an opened camera into which he
was putting film, and moved it back and forth in the direction of the
bassinet, grinning and nodding. She looked down and started to cry. She
wiped at her eyes.

Roman came in holding the arm of a robust, handsome, dark-skinned

man in a snow-white suit and white shoes. He carried a large box wrapped
in light blue paper patterned with Teddy bears and candy canes. Musical
sounds came from it. Everyone gathered to meet him and shake his hand.
“Worried,” they said, and “pleasure,” and “airport,” and “Stavropoulos,”
and “occasion.” Laura-Louise brought the box to the bassinet. She held it
up for the baby to see, shook it for him to hear, and put it on the window
seat with many other boxes similarly wrapped and a few that were wrapped
in black with black ribbon.

“Just after midnight on June twenty-fifth,” Roman said. “Exactly half

the year ’round from you-know. Isn’t it perfect?”

“But why are you surprised?” the newcomer asked with both his hands

outstretched. “Didn’t Edmond Lautréamont predict June twenty-fifth three
hundred years ago?”

“Indeed he did,” Roman said, smiling, “but it’s such a novelty for one of

his predictions to prove accurate!” Everyone laughed. “Come, my friend,”
Roman said, drawing the newcomer forward, “come see Him. Come see the
Child.”

They went to the bassinet, where Laura-Louise waited with a

shopkeeper’s smile, and they closed around it and looked into it silently.
After a few moments the newcomer lowered himself to his knees.

Guy and Mr. Wees came in.
They waited in the archway until the newcomer had risen, and then Guy

came over to Rosemary. “She’ll be all right,” he said; “Abe is in there with
her.” He stood looking down at her, his hands rubbing at his sides. “They
promised me you wouldn’t be hurt,” he said. “And you haven’t been, really.

I mean, suppose you’d had a baby and lost it; wouldn’t it be the same? And
we’re getting so much in return, Ro.”

She put the handkerchief on the table and looked at him. As hard as she

could she spat at him.

He flushed and turned away, wiping at the front of his jacket. Roman

caught him and introduced him to the newcomer, Argyron Stavropoulos.

“How proud you must be,” Stavropoulos said, clasping Guy’s hand in

both his own. “But surely that isn’t the mother there? Why in the name of
—” Roman drew him away and spoke in his ear.

“Here,” Minnie said, and offered Rosemary a mug of steaming tea.

“Drink this and you’ll feel a little better.”

Rosemary looked at it, and looked up at Minnie. “What’s in it?” she

said; “tannis root?”

ordinary Lipton tea. You drink it.” She put it down by the handkerchief.

Save the world from God-knows-what. From Satan-knows-what.
A tail! The buds of his horns!
She wanted to scream, to die.
She would do it, throw it out and jump.
They were all milling around now. Pleasant cocktail party. The Japanese

was taking pictures; of Guy, of Stavropoulos, of Laura-Louise holding the
baby.

She turned away, not wanting to see.
Those eyes! Like an animal’s, a tiger’s, not like a human being’s!
He wasn’t a human being, of course. He was—some kind of a half-

breed.

And how dear and sweet he had looked before he had opened those

yellow eyes! The tiny chin, a bit like Brian’s; the sweet mouth; all that

lovely orange-red hair…It would be nice to look at him again, if only he
wouldn’t open those yellow animal-eyes.

She tasted the tea. It was tea.
No, she couldn’t throw him out the window. He was her baby, no matter

who the father was. What she had to do was go to someone who would
understand. Like a priest. Yes, that was the answer; a priest. It was a
problem for the Church to handle. For the Pope and all the cardinals to deal
with, not stupid Rosemary Reilly from Omaha.

Killing was wrong, no matter what.
She drank more tea.
He began whimpering because Laura-Louise was rocking the bassinet

too fast, so of course the idiot began rocking it faster.

She stood it as long as she could and then got up and went over.
“Get away from here,” Laura-Louise said. “Don’t you come near Him.

Roman!”

“You’re rocking him too fast,” she said.
“Sit down!” Laura-Louise said, and to Roman, “Get her out of here. Put

her back where she belongs.”

Rosemary said, “She’s rocking him too fast; that’s why he’s

whimpering.”

“Mind your own business!” Laura-Louise said.
“Let Rosemary rock Him,” Roman said.
Laura-Louise stared at him.
“Go on,” he said, standing behind the bassinet’s hood. “Sit down with

the others. Let Rosemary rock Him.”

“She’s liable—”
“Sit down with the others, Laura-Louise.”
She huffed, and marched away.
“Rock Him,” Roman said to Rosemary, smiling. He moved the bassinet

back and forth toward her, holding it by the hood.

She stood still and looked at him. “You’re trying to—get me to be his

mother,” she said.

“Aren’t you His mother?” Roman said. “Go on. Just rock Him till He

stops complaining.”

She let the black-covered handle come into her hand, and closed her

fingers around it. For a few moments they rocked the bassinet between

them, then Roman let go and she rocked it alone, nice and slowly. She
glanced at the baby, saw his yellow eyes, and looked to the window. “You
should oil the wheels,” she said. “That could bother him too.”

“I will,” Roman said. “You see? He’s stopped complaining. He knows

who you are.”

“Don’t be silly,” Rosemary said, and looked at the baby again. He was

watching her. His eyes weren’t that bad really, now that she was prepared
for them. It was the surprise that had upset her. They were pretty in a way.
“What are his hands like?” she asked, rocking him.

“They’re very nice,” Roman said. “He has claws, but they’re very tiny

and pearly. The mitts are only so He doesn’t scratch Himself, not because
His hands aren’t attractive.”

“He looks worried,” she said.
Dr. Sapirstein came over. “A night of surprises,” he said.
“Go away,” she said, “or I’m going to spit in your face.”
“Go away, Abe,” Roman said, and Dr. Sapirstein nodded and went

away.

“Not you,” Rosemary said to the baby. “It’s not your fault. I’m angry at

them, because they tricked me and lied to me. Don’t look so worried; I’m
not going to hurt you.”

“He knows that,” Roman said.
“Then what does he look so worried for?” Rosemary said. “The poor

little thing. Look at him.”

“In a minute,” Roman said. “I have to attend to my guests. I’ll be right

back.” He backed away, leaving her alone.

“Word of honor I’m not going to hurt you,” she said to the baby. She

bent over and untied the neck of his gown. “Laura-Louise made this too
tight, didn’t she. I’ll make it a little looser and then you’ll be more
comfortable. You have a very cute chin; are you aware of that fact? You
have strange yellow eyes, but you have a very cute chin.”

She tied the gown more comfortably for him.
Poor little creature.
He couldn’t be all bad, he just couldn’t. Even if he was half Satan,

wasn’t he half her as well, half decent, ordinary, sensible, human being? If
she worked against them, exerted a good influence to counteract their bad
one…

“You have a room of your own, do you know that?” she said, undoing

the blanket around him, which was also too tight. “It has white-and-yellow
wallpaper and a white crib with yellow bumpers, and there isn’t one drop of
witchy old black in the whole place. We’ll show it to you when you’re
ready for your next feeding. In case you’re curious, I happen to be the lady
who’s been supplying all that milk you’ve been drinking. I’ll bet you
thought it comes in bottles, didn’t you. Well it doesn’t; it comes in mothers,
and I’m yours. That’s right, Mr. Worry-face. You seem to greet the idea
with no enthusiasm whatsoever.”

Silence made her look up. They were gathering around to watch her,

stopping at a respectful distance.

She felt herself blushing and turned back to tucking the blanket around

the baby. “Let them watch,” she said; “we don’t care, do we? We just want
to be all cozy and comfortable, like so. There. Better?”

“Hail Rosemary,” Helen Wees said.
The others took it up. “Hail Rosemary.” “Hail Rosemary.” Minnie and

Stavropoulos and Dr. Sapirstein. “Hail Rosemary.” Guy said it too. “Hail
Rosemary.” Laura-Louise moved her lips but made no sound.

“Hail Rosemary, mother of Adrian!” Roman said.
She looked up from the bassinet. “It’s Andrew,” she said. “Andrew John

Woodhouse.”

“Adrian Steven,” Roman said.
Guy said, “Roman, look,” and Stavropoulos, at Roman’s other side,

touched his arm and said, “Is the name of so great an importance?”

“It is. Yes. It is,” Roman said. “His name is Adrian Steven.”
Rosemary said, “I understand why you’d like to call him that, but I’m

sorry; you can’t. His name is Andrew John. He’s my child, not yours, and
this is one point that I’m not even going to argue about. This and the
clothes. He can’t wear black all the time.”

Roman opened his mouth but Minnie said “Hail Andrew” in a loud

voice, looking right at him.

Everyone else said “Hail Andrew” and “Hail Rosemary, mother of

Andrew” and “Hail Satan.”

Rosemary tickled the baby’s tummy. “You didn’t like ‘Adrian,’ did

you?” she asked him. “ should think not. ‘Adrian Steven’! Will you please
stop looking so worried?” She poked the tip of his nose. “Do you know how

to smile yet, Andy? Do you? Come on, little funny-eyes Andy, can you
smile? Can you smile for Mommy?” She tapped the silver ornament and set
it swinging. “Come on, Andy,” she said. “One little smile. Come on, Andy-
candy.”

The Japanese slipped forward with his camera, crouched, and took two

three four pictures in quick succession.

