P a r t  O n e

paRis! in paRis iT Was, in The 
summer of 1840. There I first 
met that strange and interesting 
young fellow, August Dupin.

Dupin was the last member 

of a well-known family, a fam-
ily which had once been rich 
and famous; he himself, however, 
was far from rich. He cared little 
about money. He had enough to 
buy the most necessary things of 
life — and a few books; he did 
not trouble himself about the 
rest. Just books. With books he 
was happy.

We first met when we were both trying to find the same book. 

As it was a book which few had ever heard of, this chance brought us 
together in an old bookstore. Later we met again in the same store. 
Then again in another bookstore. Soon we began to talk.

I was deeply interested in the family history he told me. I was sur-

prised, too, at how much and how widely he had read; more import-
ant, the force of his busy mind was like a bright light in my soul. I 
felt that the friendship of such a man would be for me riches without 
price. I therefore told him of my feelings toward him, and he agreed to 

come and live with me. He would have, I thought, the joy of using my 
many fine books. And I would have the pleasure of having someone 
with me, for I was not happy alone.

We passed the days reading, writing and talking. But Dupin was a 

lover of the night, and at night, often with only the light of the stars 
to show us the way, we walked the streets of Paris, sometimes talking, 
sometimes quiet, always thinking.

I soon noticed a special reasoning power he had, an unusual 

reasoning power. Using it gave him great pleasure. He told me once, 
with a soft and quiet laugh, that most men have windows over their 
hearts; through these he could see into their souls. Then, he surprised 
me by telling what he knew about my own soul; and I found that he 
knew things about me that I had thought only I could possibly know. 
His manner at these moments was cold and distant. His eyes looked 
empty and far away, and his voice became high and nervous. At such 
times it seemed to me that I saw not just Dupin, but two Dupins — 
one who coldly put things together, and another who just as coldly 
took them apart.

One night we were walking down one of Paris’s long and dirty 

streets. Both of us were busy with our thoughts. Neither had spoken 
for perhaps fifteen minutes. It seemed as if we had each forgotten that 
the other was there, at his side. I soon learned that Dupin had not 
forgotten me, however. Suddenly he said:

“You’re right. He is a very little fellow, that’s true, and he would 

be more successful if he acted in lighter, less serious plays.”

“Yes, there can be no doubt of that!” I said.
At first I saw nothing strange in this. Dupin had agreed with me, 

with my own thoughts. This, of course, seemed to me quite natural. 
For a few seconds I continued walking, and thinking; but suddenly 
I realized that Dupin had agreed with something which was only a 
thought. I had not spoken a single word. I stopped walking and turned 
to my friend. “Dupin,” I said, “Dupin, this is beyond my understand-
ing. How could you know that I was thinking of….” Here I stopped, in  
order to test him, to learn if he really did know my unspoken thoughts.

“How did I know you were thinking of Chantilly? Why do you 

stop? You were thinking that Chantilly is too small for the plays in 
which he acts.”

“That is indeed what I was thinking. But, tell me, in Heaven’s 

name, the method — if method there is — by which you have been 
able to see into my soul in this matter.”

“It was the fruit-seller.”
“Fruit-seller!? I know no fruit-seller.”
“I mean the man who ran into you as we entered this street — it 

may have been ten or fifteen minutes ago, perhaps less.”

“Yes; yes, that’s true, I remember now. A fruit-seller, carrying a 

large basket of apples on his head, almost threw me down. But I don’t 
understand why the fruit-seller should make me think of Chantilly — 
or, if he did, how you can know that.”

“I will explain. Listen closely now:
“Let us follow your thoughts from the fruit-seller to the play-ac-

tor, Chantilly. Those thoughts must have gone like this: from the 
fruit-seller to the cobblestones, from the cobblestones to stereotomy, 
and from stereotomy to Epicurus, to Orion, and then to Chantilly.

“As we turned into this street the fruit-seller, walking very quick-

ly past us, ran against you and made you step on some cobblestones 
which had not been put down evenly, and I could see that the stones 
had hurt your foot. You spoke a few angry words to yourself, and con-
tinued walking. But you kept looking down, down at the cobblestones 
in the street, so I knew you were still thinking of stones.

“Then we came to a small street where they are putting down 

street stones which they have cut in a new and very special way. Here 
your face became brighter and I saw your lips move. I could not doubt 
that you were saying the word stereotomy, the name for this new way 
of cutting stones. It is a strange word, isn’t it? But you will remember 
that we read about it in the newspaper only yesterday. I thought that 
the word stereotomy must make you think of that old Greek writer 
named Epicurus, who wrote of something he called atoms; he believed 
that the world and everything in the heavens above are made of these 
atoms.

“Not long ago you and I were talking about Epicurus and his 

ideas, his atoms, ideas which Epicurus wrote about more than 2,000 
years ago. We were talking about how much those old ideas are like 
today’s ideas about the earth and the stars and the sky. I felt sure that 
you would look up to the sky. You did look up. Now I was certain that 

I had been following your thoughts as they had in fact come into your 
mind. I too looked up, and saw that the group of stars we call Orion is 
very bright and clear tonight. I knew you would notice this, and think 
about the name Orion.

“Now follow my thoughts carefully. Only yesterday, in the news-

paper, there was an article about the actor Chantilly, an article which 
was not friendly to Chantilly, not friendly at all. We noticed that the 
writer of the article had used some words taken from a book we both 
had read. These words were about Orion. So I knew you would put 
together the two ideas of Orion and Chantilly. I saw you smile, remem-
bering that article and the hard words in it.

“Then I saw you stand straighter, as tall as you could make your-

self. I was sure you were thinking of Chantilly’s size, and especially his 
height. He is small; he is short. And so I spoke, saying that he is indeed 
a very little fellow, this Chantilly, and he would be more successful if 
he acted in lighter, less serious plays.”

I will not say that I was surprised. I was more than surprised; I 

was astonished. Dupin was right, as right as he could be. Those were 
in fact my thoughts, my unspoken thoughts, as my mind moved from 
one thought to the next. But if I was astonished by this, I would soon 
be more than astonished.

One morning this strangely interesting man showed me once 

again his unusual reasoning power. We heard that an old woman had 
been killed by unknown persons. The killer, or the killers, had cut 
her head off — and escaped into the night. Who was this killer, this 
murderer? The police had no answer. They had looked everywhere 
and found nothing that helped them. They did not know what to do 
next. And so — they did nothing.

But not Dupin. He knew what to do.

P a r t  Tw o

iT Was in paRis in The summeR 
of 1840 that I met August Dupin. 
He was an unusually interesting 
young man with a busy, forceful 
mind. This mind could, it seemed, 
look right through a man’s body 
into his soul, and uncover his 
deepest thoughts. Sometimes he 
seemed to be not one, but two 
people — one who coldly put 
things together, and another who 
just as coldly took them apart.

One morning, in the heat of 

the summer, Dupin showed me once again his special reasoning power. 
We read in the newspaper about a terrible killing. An old woman and 
her daughter, living alone in an old house in the Rue Morgue, had 
been killed in the middle of the night:

Paris, July 7, 1840. In the early morning today the people in the 
western part of the city were awakened from their sleep by cries of 
terror, which came, it seemed, from a house in the street called the 
Rue Morgue. The only persons living in the house were an old woman, 
Mrs. L’Espanaye, and her daughter. Several neighbors and a police-
man ran toward the house, but by the time they reached it the cries had 
stopped. When no one answered their calls, they forced the door open. 

As they rushed in they heard voices, two voices; they seemed to come 
from above. The group hurried from room to room, but they found 
nothing until they reached the fourth floor. There they found a door 
that was firmly closed, locked, with the key inside. Quick ly they forced 
the door open, and they saw spread be fore them a bloody sickening 
scene — a scene of horror!

The room was in the wildest possible order — broken chairs and tables 
were lying all around the room. There was only one bed, and from it 
everything had been taken and thrown into the middle of the floor. 
There was blood everywhere, on the floor, on the bed, on the walls. A 
sharp knife covered with blood was lying on the floor. In front of the 
fireplace there was some long gray hair, also bloody; it seemed to have 
been pulled from a human head. On the floor were four pieces of gold, 
an earring, several objects made of silver, and two bags containing a 
large amount of money in gold. Clothes had been thrown around the 
room. A box was found under the bed covers. It was open, and held 
only a few old letters and papers.

There was no one there — or so it seemed. Above the fireplace they 
found the dead body of the daughter; it had been put up into the 
opening where the smoke escapes to the sky. The body was still warm. 
There was blood on the face, and on the neck there were dark, deep 
marks which seemed to have been made by strong fingers. These marks 
surely show how the daughter was killed.

After hunting in every part of the house without finding anything 
more, the group went outside. Behind the building they found the body 
of the old woman. Her neck was almost cut through, and when they 
tried to lift her up, her head fell off.

The next day the newspaper offered to its readers these new facts:

The Murders in the Rue Morgue. —Paris, July 8, 1840. The police 
have talked with many people about the terrible killings in the old 
house on the Rue Morgue but nothing has been learned to answer the 
question of who the killers were.

Pauline Dubourg, a washwoman, says she has known both of the 
dead women for more than three years, and has washed their clothes 
during that period. The old lady and her daughter seemed to love each 
other dearly. They always paid her well. She did not know where their 
money came from, she said. She never met anyone in the house. Only 
the two women lived on the fourth floor.

Pierre Moreau, a shopkeeper, says Mrs. L’Espanaye had bought food 
at his shop for nearly four years. She owned the house and had lived 
in it for more than six years. People said they had money. He never 
saw anyone enter the door except the old lady and her daughter, and 
a doctor eight or ten times, perhaps.

Many other persons, neighbors, said the same thing. Almost no one 
ever went into the house and Mrs. L’Espanaye and her daughter were 
not often seen.

Jules Mignaud, a banker, says that Mrs. L’Espanaye had put money in 
his bank, beginning eight years before. Three days before her death she 
took out of the bank a large amount of money, in gold. A man from 
the bank carried it for her to her house.

Isidore Muset, a policeman, says that he was with the group that first 
entered the house. While he was going up the stairs he heard two voic-
es, one low and soft, and one hard, high, and very strange — the voice 
of someone who was certainly not French, the voice of a foreigner. 
Spanish perhaps. It was not a woman’s voice. He could not understand 
what it said. But the low voice, the softer voice, said, in French, “My 
God!”

Alfonso Garcia, who is Spanish and lives on the Rue Morgue, says he 
entered the house but did not go up the stairs; he is nervous and he was 
afraid he might be ill. He heard the voices. He believes the high voice 
was not that of a Frenchman. Perhaps it was English; but he doesn’t 
understand English, so he is not sure.

William Bird, another foreigner, an Englishman, says he was one of 
the persons who entered the house. He has lived in Paris for two years. 
He heard the voices. The low voice was that of a Frenchman, he was 
sure, because he heard it say, in French, “My God!” The high voice 
was very loud. He is sure it was not the voice of an Englishman, nor 
the voice of a Frenchman. It seemed to be that of an Italian. It might 
have been a woman’s voice. He does not understand Italian.

Mr. Alberto Montani, an Italian, was passing the house at the time 
of the cries. He says that they lasted for about two minutes. They 
were screams, long and loud, terrible, fearful sounds. Montani, who 
speaks Spanish but not French, says that he also heard two voices. He 
thought both voices were French. But he could not understand any of 
the words spoken.

The persons who first entered the house all agree that the door of the 
room where the daughter’s body was found was locked on the inside. 
When they reached the door everything was quiet. When they forced 
the door open they saw no one. The windows were closed and firmly 
locked on the inside. There are no steps that someone could have gone 
down while they were going up. They say that the openings over the 
fireplace are too small for anyone to have escaped through them. It 
took four or five people to pull the daughter’s body out of the open-
ing over the fireplace. A careful search was made through the whole 
house. It was four or five minutes from the time they heard the voices 
to the moment they forced open the door of the room.

Paul Dumas, a doctor, says that he was called to see the bodies soon 
after they were found. They were in a horrible condition, badly marked 
and broken. Such results could not have come from a woman’s hands, 
only from those of a very powerful man. The daughter had been killed 
by strong hands around her neck.

The police have learned nothing more than this. A killing as strange as 
this has never before happened in Paris. The police do not know where 
to begin to look for the answer.

When we had finished reading the newspaper’s account of the 

murders neither Dupin nor myself said anything for a while. But I 
could see in his eyes that cold, empty look which told me that his 
mind was working busily. When he asked me what I thought of all 
this, I could only agree with all Paris. I told him I considered it a very 
difficult problem — a mystery, to which it was not possible to find an 
answer. No, no, said Dupin.

“No, I think you are wrong. A mystery it is, yes. But there must 

be an answer. Let us go to the house and see what we can see. There 
must be an answer. There must!”

P a r t  T h r e e

iT Was in paRis ThaT i meT 
August Dupin. He was an un  usually 
interesting young man with a busy, 
forceful mind. This mind could, it 
seemed, look right through a man’s 
body into his deepest soul.

One hot summer morning we 

read in the newspapers about a 
terrible killing. The dead persons 
were an old woman and her unmar-
ried daughter, who lived alone on 
the fourth floor of an old house on 
the street called the Rue Morgue. 
Someone had taken the 
daughter’s neck in his 
powerful fingers and 
pressed with fearful strength until her life was gone. Her mother’s 
body was found outside, behind the house, with the head nearly cut 
off. The knife with which she was killed was found, however, in the 
room, on the floor.

Several neighbors ran to the house when they heard the women’s 

cries of fear. As they ran up to the fourth floor they heard two other 
voices. But when they reached the room and broke down the door 
they found no living person in the room. Like the door, the two 

windows were firmly closed, locked on the inside. There was no other 
way that the killer could have got in or out of the room.

The Paris police did not know where to begin to look for the 

answer. I told Dupin that it seemed to me that it was not possible to 
learn the answer to the mystery of these killings. No, no, said Dupin.

“No; I think you are wrong. A mystery it is, yes. But there must 

be an answer. We must not judge what is possible just by what we have 
read in the newspapers. The Paris police work hard and often get good 
results; but there is no real method in what they do. When something 
more than simple hard work is needed, when a little real method is 
needed, the police fail. Sometimes they stand too near the problem. 
Often, if a person looks at something very closely he can see a few 
things more clearly, but the shape of the whole thing escapes him.

“There must be an answer! There must! Let us go to the house 

and see what we can see. I know the head of the police, and he will 
allow us to do so. And this will be interesting and give us some plea-
sure.”

I thought it strange that Dupin should believe we would get plea-

sure out of this. But I said nothing.

It was late in the afternoon when we reached the house on the 

Rue Morgue. It was easily found for there were still many persons — in 
fact, a crowd, standing there looking at it. Before going in we walked 
all around it, and Dupin carefully looked at the neighboring houses as 
well as this one. I could not understand the reason for such great care.

We came again to the front of the house and went in. We went 

up the stairs into the room where the daughter’s body had been 
found. Both bodies were there. The police had left the room as they 
had found it. I saw nothing beyond what the newspaper had told us. 
Dupin looked with great care at every thing, at the bodies, the walls, 
the fireplace, the windows. Then we went home.

Dupin said nothing. I could see the cold look in his eyes which 

told me that his mind was working, working busily, quickly. I asked no 
questions.

Dupin said nothing until the next morning, when he came into 

my room and asked me suddenly if I had not no ticed something espe-
cially strange about what we saw at the house on the Rue Morgue. I 
replied: “Nothing more than we both read in the newspaper.”

“Tell me, my friend. How shall we explain the horrible force, the 

unusual strength used in these murders? And whose were the voices 
that were heard? No one was found except the dead women; yet there 
was no way for anyone to escape. And the wild condition of the room; 
the body which was found head down above the fireplace; the terrible 
broken appearance of the body of the old lady, with its head cut off; 
these are all so far from what might be expected that the police are 
standing still; they don’t know where to begin.

“These things are unusual, indeed; but they are not deep 

mysteries. We should not ask, ‘What has happened?’ but ‘What has 
happened that has never happened before?’ In fact, the very things 
that the police think cannot possibly be ex plained are the things 
which will lead me to the answer. In deed, I believe they have already 
led me to the answer.”

I was so surprised I could not say a word. Dupin looked quickly 

at the door. “I am now waiting for a person who will know something 
about these murders, these wild killings. I do not think he did them 
himself. But I think he will know the killer. I hope I am right about 
this. If I am, then I expect to find the whole answer, today. I expect 
the man here — in this room — at any moment. It is true that he may 
not come; but he probably will.”

“But who is this person? How did you find him?”
“I’ll tell you. While we wait for this man we do not know — for I 

have never met him — while we wait, I will tell you how my thoughts 
went.” Dupin began to talk. But it did not seem that he was trying to 
explain to me what he had thought. It seemed that he was talking to 
himself. He looked not at me, but at the wall.

“It has been fully proved that the voices heard by the neighbors 

were not the voices of the women who were killed. Someone else 
was in the room. It is therefore certain that the old woman did not 
first kill her daughter and then kill herself. She would not have been 
strong enough to put her daughter’s body where it was found; and the 
manner of the old lady’s death shows that she could not have caused 
it herself. A per son can kill himself with a knife, yes. But he surely 
cannot cut his own head almost off, then drop the knife on the floor 
and jump out the window. It was murder, then, done by some third 
person — or persons. And the voices heard were the voic es of these 

persons. Let us now think carefully about the things people said about 
those voices. Did you notice anything especially strange in what was 
told about them?”

“Well, yes. Everybody agreed that the low voice was the voice of 

a Frenchman; but they could not agree about the high voice.”

“Ah! That was what they said, yes; but that was not what was 

so strange about what they said. You say you have noticed nothing 
that makes their stories very different from what might have been 
expected. Yet there was something. All these persons, as you say, 
agreed about the low voice; but not about the high hard voice. The 
strange thing here is that when an Italian, an Englishman, a Spaniard, 
and a Frenchman tried to tell what the voice was like, each one said 
it sounded like the voice of a foreigner. How strangely unusual that 
voice really must have been! Here are four men from four big coun-
tries, and not one of them could understand what the voice said; each 
one gave it a different name.

“Now, I know that there are other countries in the world. You will 

say that perhaps it was the voice of someone from one of those other 
lands — Russia, perhaps. But remem ber, not one of these people heard 
anything that sounded like a separate word.”

Here Dupin turned and looked into my eyes.
“This is what we have learned from the newspaper. I don’t know 

what I have led you to think. But I believe that in this much of the 
story there are enough facts to lead us in the one and only direction 
to the right answer. What this answer is, I will not say…not yet. But I 
want you to keep in mind that this much was enough to tell me what 
I must look for when we were in that house on the Rue Morgue. And 
I found it!”

P a r t  F o u r

muRdeReRs had come To The old house on The sTReeT called 
the Rue Morgue! Murderers had come and gone and left behind the 
dead bodies of an old woman and her daughter. The daughter’s body 
was in the bedroom on the fourth floor. The old woman was lying 
outside, behind the house, her head almost cut off; but the knife 
which killed her was up in the bedroom, on the floor. The door and 
the windows were all firmly closed, locked on the inside; there was no 
way for anyone to go in or out. Voices had been heard. One voice was 
speaking in French; the other voice had not spoken even one word 
that anyone could understand. But there was no one in the room 
when police arrived.

This much we had learned from the newspapers, my friend Dupin 

and I. Interested by it, we had gone to look at the house and the bod-
ies. Dupin was now explaining to me what he had learned there.

“That is what we learned from the newspapers. Please remember 

it; for that much was enough to tell me what I must look for when we 
were in that house on the Rue Morgue. And I found it!

“Let us now take ourselves again, in our thoughts, to the room 

where the murders were done. What shall we first look for? The way 
the murderers escaped. All right. We agree, I am sure, that we do not 
have to look for anything outside of nature, for anything not having 
a real form, a body. The killers were not spirits; they were real. They 
could not go through the walls. Then how did they escape? There is 
only one way to reason on that subject, and it must lead us to the 
answer. Let us look, one at a time, at the possible ways to escape. It is 

clear that the killers were in the room where the daughter was found. 
From this room they must have escaped. How?

“At first I saw no way out. It had been necessary for the neigh-

bors to break down the door in order to enter the room. There was no 
other door. The opening above the fireplace is not big enough, near 
the top, for even a small animal. The murderers therefore must have 
escaped through one of the windows. This may not seem possible. We 
must prove that it is possible.

“There are two windows in the room. Both of them, you will 

remember, are made of two parts; to open the window one must lift up 
the bottom half. One of these windows is easily seen; the lower part of 
the other is out of sight behind the big bed. I looked carefully at the 
first of these windows. It was firmly closed, fastened, like the door, on 
the inside. To keep the window closed, to fasten it, someone had put a 
strong iron nail into the wood at the side of the window in such a way 
that the window could not be raised. At least it seemed that the nail 
held the window closed. The nail was easy to see. There it was. And 
the people who discovered the kil l ings used their greatest strength 
and could not raise the win  dow. I, too, tried to raise the window and 
could not.

“I went to the second window and looked behind the bed at the 

lower half of the window. There was a nail here, too, which held the 
window closed. Without moving the bed, I tried to open this window 
also, and again I could not do so.

“I did not stop looking for an answer, however, because I knew 

that what did not seem possible must be proved to be possible. The 
killers — or perhaps I should say, the killer, for I am almost certain 
there was only one — the killer escaped through one of these win-
dows. Of this I felt certain. After the murderer had left the bedroom 
he could have closed the win dow from the outside; but he could not 
have fastened it again on the inside. Yet anyone could see the nails 
which held the windows tightly closed. This was the fact that stopped 
the police. How could the murderer put the nail back in its place?”

“Perhaps — perhaps if you pulled out the nail….”
“Yes! That is just what I thought. Two things seemed clear: first, 

there had to be something wrong with the idea that the nails were 
holding the windows closed. I didn’t know what was wrong. Something 

was. Second, if it was not the nails which were holding the windows 
closed, then something else was holding them closed, something hard 
to see, some thing hidden.

“I went back to the first window. With great effort I pulled out the 

nail. Then I again tried to raise the window. It was still firmly closed. 
This did not surprise me. There had to be a hidden lock, I thought, 
inside the window. I felt the window carefully with my fingers. Indeed, 
I found a button which, when I pressed it, opened an inner lock. With 
almost no effort I raised the window.

“Now I knew that the killer could close the window from out-

side and the window would lock itself. But there was still the nail. 
Carefully, I put the nail back into the hole from which I had taken it. 
Then I pressed the button and tried to raise the window. I could not. 
The nail also was holding the window closed!”

“Then…then the murderer could not possibly have gone out the 

window.”

“He could not have gone out that window. Therefore, he must 

have escaped through the other window. The other win dow was also 
held closed by a nail. But I knew I must be right. Although no one 
else had looked carefully at the window behind the bed, I went to it 
and tried to see whether the two windows were in some way different. 
The nail in the second window looked the same as the one I had just 
seen. I moved the bed so that I could look closely. Yes. There was a 
button here, too. I was so sure I was right that without touching the 
nail I pressed the button and tried to raise the window. Up it went!

“As the window went up it carried with it the top part of the nail, 

the head. When I closed the window the head of the nail was again 
in its place. It looked just as it had looked before. I took the head of 
the nail in my fingers and it easily came away from the window. I saw 
that the nail had been broken. But when I put the nail head back in 
its place, the nail again looked whole.

“What seemed to be not possible we have proved to be possible. 

The murderer indeed escaped through that window. I could now see, 
in my mind, what had happened.

“It was a hot summer night. When the murderer first arrived 

he found that window open, open to let some of the fresh night air 
come in. Through the open window the mur derer went in and came 

out again. As he came out he closed the window, perhaps with a pur-
pose to do so, perhaps by chance. The special lock inside the window 
held the window firmly closed. The nail only seemed to be holding it 
closed. And that which was possible looked not possible.”

Dupin had been talking not to me, it seemed, but to himself. 

His cold eyes seemed to see only what was in his own mind. Now he 
stopped and looked straight at me. His eyes were now hard and bright. 
And I understood that using his unusual reasoning power to find the 
answer to those bloody murders was giving Dupin great pleasure!

At first I could think only of this. Then I said: “Dupin — the 

windows are on the fourth floor, far above the ground. Even an open 
window….”

“Yes. That is an interesting question: how did the mur derer go 

from the window down to the ground? Once I was quite certain that 
the murderer had in fact gone through that window the rest was not 
so hard to know. And the answer to this question told me still more 
about who the murderer was!

“When you and I first came to the house on the Rue Morgue 

we walked around the house. At that time I noted a long, thin metal 
pole which went from the top of the build  ing to the ground — a 
lightning rod, put there to carry down to the ground a charge of elec-
tricity that might come out of the clouds during a bad summer storm. 
Here, I thought, is a way for someone to go up or down the wall, and 
then to go in or out the window. He would have to be very strong. 
Although certain animals could easily go up the pole, not every man 
could do it — only a man with very special strength and special train-
ing. This told me more about what the murderer was like. But I still 
had the question: who?”

P a r t  F i v e

ThaT unusual fRenchman, augusT 
Dupin, was still explaining to me how 
he found the answer to the question of 
who murdered the two women in the 
house on the Rue Morgue. We now 
knew that it was indeed possible for 
the killer to go in and again out one of 
the windows and still leave them both 
firmly closed, locked on the inside. 
And I agreed with Dupin when he said 
that only someone with very special 
strength and training could have gone 
up the lightning rod on the side of the house and thus entered the 
window. But who the murderer was, we still did not know.

“Let us look again,” said Dupin, “at that room on the fourth 

floor. Let us now go back, in our minds, to the room we saw yesterday. 
Consider its appearance. Clothes had been thrown around the room; 
yet it seemed that none had been taken. The old woman and her 
daughter almost never left the house. They had little use for many 
clothes. Those that were found in the room were as good as any they 
had. If the killer took some, why didn’t he take the best — or take 
all? And why would he take a few clothes and leave all the money? 
Nearly the whole amount brought from the bank was found, in bags, 
on the floor.

“I want you therefore to forget the idea in the minds of the police, 

the idea that a desire for money was what they call the motive, the 
reason for the murders. This idea rose in their minds when they heard 
how the money was brought to the house three days before the killings. 
But this is only what we call a coincidence — two things happening 
at the same time, but only by chance and not because of some cause, 
some cause that brought them together. Coincidences happen to all 
of us every day of our lives. If the gold was the reason for the murders, 
the killer must have been quite a fool to forget and leave it there.

“No. I don’t think the desire for money was the reason for the 

killings. I think that there was no reason for these killings…except, 
perhaps, fear.

“Now let us look at the murders themselves. A girl is killed by 

powerful hands around her neck, then the body is placed in the open-
ing over the fireplace, head down. No murders we usually hear about 
are like this. There is something here that does not fit our ideas of 
human actions, even when we think of men of the most terrible kind. 
Think, also, of the great strength which was necessary to put the body 
where it was found. The strength of several men was needed to pull 
it down!

“There are other signs of this fearful strength. In front of the fire-

place some gray human hair was lying, thick pieces of it, pulled from 
the head of the old woman. You saw the hair on the floor yourself, and 
you saw the blood and skin with it. You know, and I know, that great 
force is necessary to pull out even twenty or thirty hairs at one time. 
A much greater force was needed to pull out hundreds of hairs at one 
time. Also, the head of the old lady was cut almost completely from 
the body. Why? To kill a woman with a knife it is not necessary to cut 
her head off!!

“If, now, added to all these things, we add also the condition of 

the room, we have put together the following ideas: strength more 
than human; wildness less than human; a murder without reason; 
horror beyond human understanding; and a voice which made no 
sound that men could understand. What result, then, have you come 
to? What have I helped you to see?”

A cold feeling went up and down my back as Dupin asked me the 

question. “A man…someone who has lost his mind,” I said. “A mad-
man!! A madman!! Only a madman could have done these murders!”

“I think not. In some ways your idea is a good one. But madmen 

are from one country or another. Their cries may be terrible, but they 
are made of words, and some of the words can be understood.

“Here! Look! Look at this hair. I took it from the fin gers of the 

old woman. The hair of a madman is not like this. Tell me what you 
think it is.”

“Dupin! This hair is…this hair is not human hair!!”
“I did not say that it is. But, before we decide this matter, look 

at the picture I had made here on this piece of paper. It is a picture of 
the marks on the daughter’s neck. The doctors said these marks were 
made by fingers. Let me spread the paper on the table before us. Try 
to put your fingers, all at the same time, on the picture, so that your  
hand and its fingers will fit the picture of the marks on the daughter’s 
neck.”

“I cannot!”
“No. But perhaps we are not doing this in the right way. The 

paper is spread out on the table; the human neck is round. Here is 
a piece of wood about as big as the daughter’s neck. Put the paper 
around it and try again. Go on! Try!”

I tried to put my fingers around the piece of wood, as if it were 

the girl’s neck! But still my hand was not large enough to equal the 
marks left by the killer. “Dupin! These marks were made by no human 
hand!”

“No. They were not. I am almost certain that they were made 

by the hand of an orangutan, one of those man-like animals that live 
in the wild forests. The great size, the strength, the wildness of these 
animals are well known. Now. Look in this book by Cuvier. Read. Look 
at the picture.”

I did so, and at once I knew that Dupin was right in everything 

he said. The color of the hair…the size of the hand…the terrible 
strength…the wildness of the kill ings…those sounds which were a 
voice but were not words…everything fit nicely in its place.

No, not everything. “Dupin!” I said. “There were two voices. 

Whose was the second voice?”

“The second voice! Yes! Remember: we decided that only some-

one with a very special kind of strength could have gone up the light-
ning rod, up the side of the house to the window on the fourth floor 
— perhaps an animal, perhaps a strong man from a circus, perhaps a 
sailor. We know now that one of the voices was the voice of an ani-
mal, an orang utan. The other was the voice of a man. This voice spoke 
only two words; they were “My God!” spoken in French.

“Upon those two words I have placed my hopes of find ing a full 

answer to this horrible question. The words were an expression of 
horror. This means that a Frenchman knew about these murders. It is 
possible — indeed it is probable — that the Frenchman himself did 
not help the orang utan to kill. Perhaps the animal escaped from him, 
and he followed it to the house on the Rue Morgue. He could not 
have caught it again. It must still be free somewhere in Paris.

“I will not continue with these guesses — for I cannot call them 

more than that. If I am right, and if the Frenchman did not himself 
help with the killings, I expect him to come here. Read this. I paid to 
have this put in the newspaper.”

I took the newspaper and read the following:

caught — Early in the morning of the seventh of this month: a very 
large orangutan. The owner, who is known to be a sailor, may have 
the animal again if he can prove it is his.

“But, Dupin. How can you know that the man is a sailor?”
“I do not know it. I am not sure of it. I think the man is a sailor. 

A sailor could go up that pole on the side of the house. Sailors travel 
to strange, faraway places where such things as orang utans can be got. 
If I am right….

“Think for a moment! The sailor will say to himself: ‘The animal 

is valuable. Why shouldn’t I go and get it? The police do not know 
the animal killed two women. And clearly somebody knows I am in 
Paris. If I do not go to get the animal, they will ask why. I don’t want 
anyone to start asking questions about the animal. So I will go and get 
the orang utan and keep it where no one will see it, until this trouble 
has passed.’ This, I believe, is how the sailor will think. But listen! I 
hear a man’s step on the stairs.”

Dupin had left the front door of the house open, and the visitor 

entered without using the bell. He came several steps up the stairs, 
then stopped. We heard him go down again. Dupin was moving toward 
the door when we again heard the stranger coming up. He did not 
turn back a second time, but came straight to the door of our room.

In a strong, warm, friendly voice, Dupin said:
“Come in, my friend! Come in!”
Slowly the door opened, and in came — a sailor!

P a r t  S i x

my fRiend dupin Was noW ceRTain ThaT The muRdeRs in The 
Rue Morgue had been done by a wild animal of the jungle, the man-
like animal known as an orang utan. The animal had escaped from its 
owner, he thought; and the owner was prob ably a sailor. He had put a 
notice in the newspaper that the man who owned the orang utan could 
have it again if he came to our house to get it. Now, as the owner came 
to our door, we were both wondering if that man would, as Dupin 
guessed, be a sailor.

Yes. The man who entered was indeed a sailor. He was a large 

man, and strong. He carried a big, heavy piece of wood, but no gun. 
He said to us, in French: “Good evening.”

“Sit down, my friend. I suppose you have come to ask about the 

orang utan. A very fine animal. I have no doubt that it is a very valu-
able animal. How old do you think it may be?”

“I have no way of guessing how old it is, but it can’t be more than 

four or five years old. Have you got it here?”

“No, no. We have no place for it here. You can get it in the morn-

ing. Of course you can prove it is yours?”

“Yes. Yes, I can.”
“I wish I could keep it.”
“I would like to have it. I…of course I will pay you for finding and 

keeping the animal. Anything…anything within reason.”

“Well…That is very fair, indeed. Let me think. What shall I ask 

for? I know! Let this be my pay. Tell me everything you know about 
the murders in the Rue Morgue.”

As quietly as he had spoken Dupin walked to the door, locked it, 

and put the key in his coat. At the same time he took a gun out of his 
coat and placed it on the table.

The sailor’s face had become red. He jumped to his feet and 

reached for his stick of wood, but in the next moment he fell back into 
his chair, trembling. His face became quite white, bloodless. He spoke 
not a word. His eyes were closed.

“My friend, you must not be afraid. We are not going to hurt 

you. I know very well that you yourself are not the killer. But it is true 
that you know something about him — or about it. From what I have 
already said, you must know that I have ways of learning about the 
matter — ways you could never have dreamed of.

“Now, I know that you yourself have done nothing wrong. You 

didn’t even take any of the money. You have no reason to be afraid to 
talk and to tell the truth. It is a matter of honor for you to tell all you 
know. And you know who the killer is.”

“So help me God! I…I’ll tell you all I know about this, all I know 

— but I don’t expect you to believe one half of what I say — not one 
half. Still, I didn’t kill anyone, and I’ll tell the whole story if I die for 
it. It was that animal! The orang utan!…

“About a year ago our ship sailed to the Far East, to the island of 

Borneo. I had never before seen Borneo. The forest, the jungle, was 
thick with trees and other plants, and hot and wet and dark. But we 
went — a friend and I — we went into that forest — for pleasure. 
There we saw this orang utan, a big animal. But we were two, and we 
caught it. We took it with us on the ship. Soon, however, my friend 
died, and the animal was mine. But it was very strong and caused a 
lot of trouble.

“In the end I brought it back to Paris with me. I kept it in my 

house, in my own house, carefully locked up, so the neighbors could 
not know about it. The animal had cut one foot badly while on the 
ship. I thought…I thought that as soon as it got well I would sell it. I 
was certain it was of great value. And it was so much trouble to keep! 
I wanted to sell it, soon.

“The night of the murders, very late, I came home and found the 

animal in my bedroom. It had got free, I don’t know how. It held a 
knife in its hands, and was playing with it. I was afraid. I didn’t know 
what to do. When it saw me it jumped up, ran out of the room and 
down the stairs. There it found an open window and jumped into the 
street. I followed, never far behind, although I had no hope of catch-
ing it again. The animal, with the knife still in its hand, stopped often 
to look back at me. But before I could come near enough to even try 
to catch it, the animal always started to run again. It seemed to be 
playing with me.

“It was nearly morning, but the streets were still dark, and quiet. 

We passed the back of a house in the Rue Morgue. The animal looked 
up and saw a light in the open window of a room high above. It was 
the only lighted window in sight. The animal saw the metal pole, went 
up it easily and quickly, and jumped into the room. All this didn’t take 
a minute.

“I didn’t know what to do. I didn’t know what I could do. I fol-

lowed the animal. I too went up the pole. As I am a sailor it was easy 
for me. But the open window was far from the pole and I was afraid 
to try to jump. I could see into the room, however, through the other 
window, which was closed.

“The two women were sitting there, with their backs to the win-

dows. Who can guess why they were not sleeping at that hour of the 
night? A box was in the middle of the floor. The papers which had 
been in the box were lying around on the floor. The women seemed 
to be studying some of these. They did not see the animal, which was 
just standing there, watching, the knife still in one hand. But the old 
woman heard it and turned her head and saw the animal there, knife 
in hand, and then…then I heard the first of those terrible cries.

“When the animal heard the old woman’s cry it caught her by the 

hair and slowly moved the knife before her face. The daughter, filled 

with terror, fell to the floor and re mained there without moving, her 
eyes closed. The old woman continued to cry for help, screaming with 
fear. I think the animal now was as afraid as the old woman was. With 
terrible force it pulled out a handful of hair. And when the woman, 
covered with blood, tried to run from it, the animal caught her again 
by the hair and with one move of its arm it nearly cut her head from 
her body. Throwing down the body, the animal turned and saw that 
the daughter was moving, watching it with horror. With fire in its eyes 
it rushed to the girl, put its powerful fingers around her neck, and 
pressed them firmly there until she died.

“When the girl stopped moving, the animal dropped her body to 

the floor and looked up. It saw my face in the win dow. It began to run 
around the room, quickly, without pur pose. It jumped up and down, 
breaking the chairs, pulling the bed to pieces. Suddenly it stopped 
and took the body of the daughter and, as if to hide it, with terrible 
strength it put the body up above the fireplace, where it was found. It 
threw the old woman out the window.

“All this time I was hanging from the pole, filled with horror. It 

seemed I had lost the power to move. But when I saw the animal com-
ing toward the window with the old woman’s body, my horror became 
fear. I went quickly down — I almost fell down the pole, and I ran. I 
didn’t look back. I ran! Oh, my God! My God!”

The Chief of the police was not happy that the answer to the 

mystery of the killings had been found by someone who was not a 
policeman. He said that people should keep to their own business. 
“Let him talk,” said Dupin.

“Let him talk. He’ll feel better for it. And he’s a good fellow. 

But he makes things less simple than they really are. Still, people call 
him skillful, and even wise. I think they say this because of the way 
he explains, carefully, fully, something which is not here, or there, or 
anywhere; and says, ‘Not possible!’ about something which is there 
before his eyes.”

