Независимый исследователь 
Гулистанский государственный университет (Узбекистан) 
 

Аннотация: Данная статья посвящена исследованию романа-предостережения «Конец Вечности» Ай-
зека Азимова, выявлению роли данного произведения в развитии американской социально-
философской научной фантастики.  
Ключевые слова: социальная научная фантастика, утопия, антиутопия, Азимов, роман-
предупреждение. 
 

“THE END OF ETERNITY” AS A NOVEL OF PREVENTION 

 
Abstract: The article is devoted to the investigation of Isaac Asimov’s “The End of Eternity” to reveal the role 
of this literary work in the development of American social-philosophical science fiction. 
Keywords: social science fiction, utopia, dystopia, Asimov, novel of prevention 

 
Many literary critics, including Donald Hassler, Scott Green, Sergei Berezhnoy and others, believe that 
for Azimov, science fiction is not just another, exceptionally popular literary genre, but a kind of speculative 
sociology.  
“Sociology”, wrote Herbert G. Wells, summing up his work, “can not be just an art or a science in the 
narrow sense of the word. It is a collection of knowledge represented in a fictitious form with the presence of a 
personal element, in other words, literature in the most sublime sense of this concepts” [1, 205-210].  
In accordance with this, he considered the creation and criticism of utopias as a literary form in which 
good sociological work could best be dressed. Sharing this opinion, Asimov compared the image of a possible 
future and other forms of social order with a kind of “social experiment on paper”. To teach the reader to the 
possibility of changes, to force him or her to reflect along various directions – that is where he saw the “great 
service role of science fiction” [2, 76]. 
Science fiction, according to Asimov, should systematically investigate possible ways of social devel-
opment, warn about dangerous trends and, most importantly, make rational thinking about the destiny of hu-
manity. Thus the growing popularity of this genre of literature in our age only increases the moral and social 
responsibility of writers. 
The novel “The End of Eternity” was written by Asimov in 1955 and is considered to be one of the best 
works of Asimov by many critics and literary specialists. 
The novel describes the activity of an organization called Eternity, which exists out of time. Eternity con-
trols time and reality, however, one can only travel through those centuries that go after the 27th (the century in 
which Eternity is based); centuries before the 27th belong, according to the terminology of the novel, to the 
primitive history.  
Travel in time requires a huge amount of energy, but Eternity has almost unlimited energy coming from 

