Budd Schulberg

 
WHAT MAKES SAMMY RUN?

Budd Schulberg’s career as a novelist began with the meteoric
success of What Makes Sammy Run? Among his other novels are
Waterfront, The Harder They Fall, Sanctuary V, and The Disenchanted,
which Anthony Burgess included in his New York Times list of “The
Ninety-nine Best Novels of the Twentieth Century.”

Schulberg won an Oscar for his screenplay On the Waterfront,

several awards for his  lm A Face in the Crowd, and a Tony
nomination for his Broadway adaptation of The Disenchanted. He
attributes his ability to adapt his own work to stage or screen to his
upbringing in Hollywood, where his father ran a major motion-
picture studio.

After publishing a new collection of short stories, Love, Action,

Laughter and Other Sad Tales (Random House, 1991), Schulberg
completed a screenplay of What Makes Sammy Run? for Warner
Brothers, following the Random House publication of the
anniversary edition of his celebrated novel.

OceanofPDF.com

ALSO BY BUDD SCHULBERG

FICTION

What Makes Sammy Run? 
The Harder They Fall
The Disenchanted 
Waterfront 
Some Faces in the Crowd 
Sanctuary V 
Everything That Moves 
Love, Action, Laughter and Other Sad Tales

NONFICTION

Loser and Still Champion: Muhammad Ali 
The Four Seasons of Success 
Swan Watch (with Geraldine Brooks) 
Moving Pictures: Memories of a Hollywood Prince 
Writers in America (Four Seasons, revised and updated)

PLAYS AND SCREENPLAYS

A Face in the Crowd (screenplay, with an introduction by Elia Kazan) 
Across the Everglades (screenplay, with an introduction) 
The Disenchanted (play, with Harvey Breit) 
What Makes Sammy Run? (musical libretto, with Stuart Schulberg) 
On the Waterfront (with an afterword)

ANTHOLOGY

From the Ashes—Voices of Watts (edited, with an introduction)

OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com

FIRST VINTAGE BOOKS EDITION, OCTOBER 1993

Copyright ©1990 by Budd Schulberg

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions.

Published in the United States by Vintage Books, a division of Random House, Inc., New

York, and simultaneously in Canada by Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto.

The novel What Makes Sammy Run? was originally published by Random House, Inc., in

1941. Copyright 1941 by Budd Schulberg. Copyright renewed 1968 by Budd Schulberg. 

The short stories, “What Makes Sammy Run?” and “Loves Comes to Sammy Glick” were

originally published in Liberty magazine. 

The Afterword was originally published as “What Makes Sammy Keep Running?” in

Newsday on August 2, 1987. Copyright © 1987 by Budd Schulberg.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Schulberg, Budd. 

        What makes Sammy run?/Budd Schulberg.—1st Vintage 

   Books ed. 

             p.   cm. 

       eISBN: 978-0-307-79073-6 

       1. Motion picture producers and directors—California—Los 

   Angeles—Fiction. 2. Hollywood (Los Angeles, Calif.)—Fiction. 

    I. Title. 

    [PS3537.C7114W45    1993] 

    813′.52–dc20                 93-10497

v3.1

OceanofPDF.com

For Saxe Commins, the “Max Perkins”
of 
Random House, devoted midwife to the
birth 
of this book and the  rst to predict for
it a 
future that a neophyte novelist thought 
uncharacteristically extravagant.

And for my children and grandchildren 
across the generations, 
 

B. S.          

OceanofPDF.com

CONTENTS

Cover
About the Author
Other Books by This Author
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication

Introduction
What Makes Sammy Run?

The Sammy Glick Short Stories

      Author’s Note

“What Makes Sammy Run?”

“Love Comes to Sammy Glick”

Afterword

OceanofPDF.com

INTRODUCTION 
TO THE MODERN LIBRARY EDITION

The choice of What Makes Sammy Run? for the Modern Library, giving it the prestige of

“a modern classic,” was a milestone in the life of the novel, and prompted the following

Introduction:

In the spring of 1941, when my  rst novel was published, I did not
expect it to have much of a sale. While expressing a good deal of
personal enthusiasm for it, my publishers warned me that works of
 ction concerned with Hollywood were notoriously poor sellers. So I
simply hoped that a few thousand readers would appreciate it for an
honest and serious e ort to throw some light on one of the less
glamorous but not insigni cant phases of Hollywood life.

Consequently—even after John O’Hara, a friend in need and in

deed in those days, had tried to warn me—I was almost totally
unprepared for the reaction to my book. Whatever else it was, it was
not mild. People were, in several senses, wild about Sammy. Some
hailed it as a long-awaited expedition into darkest Hollywood. I
found myself acclaimed for honesty, insight, courage. Lest this
sound faintly megalomaniacal, I hasten to add that people also
hated my book. Some said it was the most disgraceful, vulgar,
callow novel they had ever read. They attacked it not only as a
slander on Hollywood, but on the human race, and I found myself
denounced as a sensationalist, a falsi er and even (since we were
still living in the afterglow of the  nger-pointing thirties) a Fascist!
There was something about the book that evoked nothing but lavish
praise, violent condemnation and incessant controversy. Only one
journal, however, managed to re ect both sides. The Daily Worker
 rst hailed the book as a masterpiece of social realism, and then,

just one week later, faced about to lambast it as a bourgeois canard
on Hollywood’s “progressive forces.”

su er inattention and cruel neglect. If I had any complaint, it was
that Sammy su ered just the opposite. Overnight the novel which I
had hoped might please a few thoughtful readers had become a
succès de scandale. Sammy, to push my French vocabulary to the
wall, was a cause célèbre. Damon Runyon welcomed him into the
inner circle of all-time all-American heels. The title became a punch
line for radio comics and tabloid captions. Winchell revealed to a
breathless nation “the true identity of Sammy Glick.” Next day the
Hollywood producer who had been positively identi ed as my
model passed my table in a restaurant and pointedly looked the
other way. Meanwhile at least three other Hollywood producers had
been similarly and just as positively identi ed. My favorite
Hollywood pubs suddenly were full of people who would corner me
with an inevitable “No kidding, I won’t tell a soul, but isn’t Sammy
really ——?”

In vain I heard myself repeating, like a record revolving in a worn

groove, that Sammy was composed in the manner of all  ctional
characters, out of the writer’s recognition of similar and overlapping
traits in various individuals who have passed within his circle of
observation. Believing frontispiece disclaimers to be empty gestures,
I omitted the old wheeze that “any resemblance is purely
coincidental.” If you wanted to think that Sammy Glick was your
boss or your nemesis or yourself, that was for you. As Somerset
Maugham had written, in behalf of all the writers accused of literary
assault and battery, “No author can create a character out of
nothing. He must have a model to give him a starting point.” I had
no lack of models when I  rst began sketching Sammy for a series of
short stories in 1937. Fresh from college, and inclined to talk too
much for a writer anyway, I happened to give a quasi-friend and
quasi-screen writer a literal answer to his casual cocktail-party
question “What’re you working on?” In my innocence I described a
little  lm story I was blocking out. A few days later I had the good
fortune to read in a movie column of the sale of my little idea,

credited to the fast-moving passerby who had seemed to be listening
so sympathetically. I say good fortune, for this mishap launched me
both on a hobby and a career. When I complained of my
misadventure to fellow scenarists, they shrugged it o  with the
observation that my wound was a mere scratch compared to any
number they had su ered. I began to wonder if every scrupulous
screen writer didn’t have a Sammy in his life.

I put down everything I heard about the credit hounds, the

shoplifters who had learned how to loiter around the idea counter.
Notes on at least two dozen quicksters went into my workbook.
That’s why I can never honestly a rm or deny when I’m asked,
“Wasn’t it really Willie Blank?” It was and it wasn’t. What I had,
when I read through my notebook, was not a single person but a
pattern of behavior. The job was—as the job of writing always is—
to recognize that pattern, to humanize it and then to try and
understand it.

Another kind of reader Sammy was apt to hear from was the

fellow who said, “Of course we know that Hollywood has its Sammy
Glicks. But why must you write about them? After all, we also have
plenty of decent, generous and gifted people. Why don’t you write
about them?” If you think of the novel as a kind of literary census-
taking, with so many chapters devoted to so many “decent” people
and so many words to so many heels, they are right, of course.
There were French philistines, passing as literary critics, who
protested against Flaubert, “Why does he devote a whole book to a
sel sh, willful, immoral, hysterical woman like Madame Bovary? Do
we not have  ne, upstanding, respectable women in the provinces
more worthy of immortality?” Not by the widest stretch of vanity
am I presuming to have written a Bovary or to shine in the re ected
brilliance of the French master. But the crime of which he was
accused—indeed for which he had to stand trial before a court of
justice!—raises a similar question of literary morality. And not only
is Flaubert’s answer my answer, but that of every serious writer
from Defoe to Faulkner: I committed this character to public
attention because I found signi cance in him (or her). Such heroes
and heroines of negativism as Julian Sorel, Emma Bovary, George

Babbitt, Julian English and Sammy Glick are symptoms that warn of
some malaise in their society. I tried to suggest Sammy’s as “a way
of life that was paying dividends in the  rst half of the twentieth
century.” It would be comforting to believe that the inverted
morality of the book is outdated. I am frequently asked, “Are there
still Sammys in Hollywood?” And the answer must be “Of course,”
though such naked aggression as I have treated may be hopefully on
the wane. But the Sammy-drive is still to be found everywhere in
America, in every  eld of endeavor and among every racial group. It
will survive as long as money and prestige and power are ends in
themselves, running wild, unharnessed from usefulness.

I would like to head into directly here—is that of anti-Semitism. An
odd axis of reactionary hush-hushers and propaganda-minded
Communist litterateurs raised quite a hue and cry along this line. I
said at the time—and even the genocidal forties has not altered my
opinion—that I despised anti-Semitism not because I happen to be
Jewish myself but because I have always opposed Neanderthalism in
any form. I hate it when a Negro is barred from his rightful place in
a state university. I hate it when an American of Jewish ancestry is
turned away from a hotel or, more important, from a job with some
great national  rm. I hate it when Russian writers of high talent like
Babel or Pilnyak, Zoschenko or Pasternak are silenced or obliterated
for the crime of writing their own themes in their own way. Social
cruelty and stupidity, for whatever reason and whatever ends, is
Neanderthal-ism. I would be unhappy about any writing of mine
that contributed to it in the slightest degree. But I did not feel guilty
of this, even when my book was published in the crucial year of
1941, and if I thought so today, after the hardest kind of thinking on
the subject, I would not consent to its reappearance. It is true that
the principal character in this book is about as unpalatable a
character as ever came down the pike. It is also true that I have
made this Sammy Click a Jew. But as Dorothy Parker said in her
review, “Those who hail us Jews as brothers must allow us to have
our villains, the same, alas, as any other race.” The attack on
Richard Wright’s hero-villain-victim Bigger Thomas in Native Son

was strikingly parallel. In defending both his book and mine against
the charge that we had played into the hands of racists by making a
member of a minority group something less than a knight in shining
armor, I wrote, “I believe that for any single reader (of Native Son)
who came away with a feeling of revulsion for the Negro race, ten
closed the book with a deepened understanding of the conditions,
the processes that turn a Bigger Thomas from a strong, ambitious,
socially useful human being into a hunted animal that kills and
hides … I planned and hoped that my book would have a similar
e ect.” While admitting the fear that bigots might be able to turn
my book against my own people and the democratic ideal, I said
this could only be done “by wrenching characters out of their
cultural sockets and paragraphs out of their continuity.”

One way of distorting the intent and meaning of the book is to

overlook the fact that every one of Sammy’s victims is also Jewish:
his idealistic father, his gentle brother, the easygoing Al Manheim,
the gifted, impractical Julian Blumberg and the fading producer
Sidney Fineman. Just as the Jews, in other words, have no
monopoly on the Sammy Glicks, Sammy himself cannot and should
not be interpreted as the personi cation of an American Jewry that
has also given us Brandeis and Gershwin, Baruch, General Rose and
Irving Berlin, not to mention Benny Friedman, Hank Greenberg and
Barney Ross. There was no passage in this book that I worked over
with greater care than:

It struck me that Julian and Sammy must have been just about the same age, twenty-two

or -three, probably brought up in the same kind of Jewish family, same neighborhood,

same schooling, and started out with practically the same job. And yet they couldn’t have

been more di erent if one had been born an Eskimo and the other the Prince of Wales. And

there were so many Julian Blumbergs in the world. Jews without money, without push,

without plots, without any of the characteristics which such experts on genetics as Adolf

Hitler, Henry Ford and Father Coughlin try to tell us are racial traits. I have seen too many

of their lonely, frightened faces packed together in subways or staring out of thousands of

dingy rooms as my train hurled past them on the elevated from 125th Street to Grand

Central, too many Jewish nebs and poets and starving tailors and everyday little guys to

consider the fascist answer to What Makes Sammy Run?

All right, if the fact of Sammy’s Jewishness is a false and

thoughtless answer to the question, then what does make Sammy
run? Of all the questions about the book that have been put to me
through the years, this is the only one I  nd irresistible. It is not so
much the novelist as the frustrated sociologist in me that stops for
this one. In fact, one of my favorite sociology professors at
Dartmouth once greeted me with, “Well, I see you got most of our
Socy 1 course into Sammy. I’ll be interested to see what you’ll be
able to do with Socy 2.” The Dartmouth sociology department,
which uses Sammy as a textbook, recently sprung on its seniors this
 nal-exam question, “What Makes Sammy Run? (Discuss for one
hour.)” I couldn’t help wondering what mark I would have received
on that one myself.

But it is less important for the novelist to solve his questions than

it is to frame them in such human terms that each reader will be
incited to come up with his own answers. One reader, Dr. Franz
Alexander, head of the Psychoanalytical Institute at the University
of Chicago, wrote his answer into a provocative book, The Age of
Unreason. Finding the ultra-aggressive, ruthless and belligerently
self-centered type rather common among second-generation
Americans from impoverished immigrant families where the father
has lost his prestige due to his inability to cope with his new
environment, Dr. Alexander writes:

A common solution is that the son usurps the father’s place in the mother’s a ection as

well as in economic importance and acquires an inordinate ambition. He wants to justify

all his mother’s hopes and sacri ces and thus appease his guilty conscience about his

father. He can do this only by becoming successful at whatever cost. Success becomes the

supreme value and failure the greatest sin because it fails to justify the sacri ce of the

father. In consequence of this all other defects such as insincerity in human relationships,

unfairness in competition, disloyalty, disregard of others, appear comparatively slight, and

the result is a ruthless careerist, obsessed by the one idea of self-promotion, a caricature of

the self-made man and a threat to Western civilization, the principle of which he has

reduced to absurdity. I am impressed by the accuracy with which Schulberg has described

this type, a victim of cultural conditions, and how well he has portrayed the hero, Sammy

Glick, the “frantic marathoner” of life, “sprinting out of his mother’s womb, turning life

into a race in which the only rules are  ght for the rail, and elbow on the turn, and the

only  nish-line is death.”

It pleased me that he recognized Sammy as a victim. In the

process of writing my book I discovered that while I had begun in a
mood of pure hatred, I felt myself, toward the end, caught up in a
compassion for Sammy’s obsession that threatened any moment to
cross over the line into sentimentality. Perhaps that is why I have
never gone on to a sequel, as originally planned. But whether I write
it or not I have a habit of stopping to wonder, every once in a while,
just what Sammy is doing this very minute. I see him now with his
antiques and his collection of French Impressionists, slowed down
somewhat, considerably re ned and comparatively mellowed. He’s
probably been analyzed, and his second marriage, made for sounder
reasons than his  rst, may last if he’s careful. He wants children
now; he has a vision of patriarchy. He has been told that he must
 nd a new set of values to  ll the moral vacuum in which he throve
and strove. In throwing over the ways of his father without learning
any sense of obligation to the Judeo-Christian-democratic pattern,
he had nothing except naked self-interest by which to guide himself.
Instead of being “between pictures,” like some of those he overcame
in his rush to the top, he may be said to be between patterns of
social responsibility. And I believe this is true not only because he
happens to be a second-generation product of the slums, but
because our American culture as a whole may be in a state of
dislocation. We are a babel of heterogeneous moralities. We are
dizzy with change. We are Sunday Christians and summer
Democrats. No wonder Sammy Glick (including all the Sammy
Glicks who would never allow him into their clubs) has found the
moral atmosphere so suitable and the underfooting so conducive to
his kind of climbing. Yes, Sammy is still running, I’m afraid, and the
question still is, How do we slow him down? Perhaps the answer
involves an even bigger question: How do we slow down the whole
culture he threatens to run away with and that threatens to run
away with us?

fast-moving and principally an entertainment? Well, there’s an old
saying—or there ought to be one—“Scratch a novelist and you  nd
a moralist.” Where is the tension in any novel to be found, after all,
but in the discrepancy between the writer’s knowledge of what is
and his vision of what ought to be?

New Hope, Pa. 
January 1952 

OceanofPDF.com

The  rst time I saw him he couldn’t have been much more than

sixteen years old, a little ferret of a kid, sharp and quick. Sammy
Glick. Used to run copy for me. Always ran. Always looked thirsty.

“Good morning, Mr. Manheim,” he said to me the  rst time we

met, “I’m the new o ce boy, but I ain’t going to be an o ce boy
long.”

“Don’t say ain’t,” I said, “or you’ll be an o ce boy forever.”
“Thanks, Mr. Manheim,” he said, “that’s why I took this job, so I

can be around writers and learn all about grammar and how to act
right.”

Nine out of ten times I wouldn’t have even looked up, but there

was something about the kid’s voice that got me. It must have been
charged with a couple of thousand volts.

“So you’re a pretty smart little feller,” I said.
“Oh, I keep my ears and eyes open,” he said.
“You don’t do a bad job with your mouth either,” I said.
“I wondered if newspapermen always wisecrack the way they do

in the movies,” he said.

“Get the hell out of here,” I answered.
He raced out, too quickly, a little ferret. Smart kid, I thought.

Smart little yid. He made me uneasy. That sharp, neat, eager little
face. I watched the thin, wiry body dart around the corner in high
gear. It made me uncomfortable. I guess I’ve always been afraid of
people who can be agile without grace.

The boss told me Sammy was getting a three-week tryout. But

Sammy did more running around that o ce in those three weeks
than Paavo Nurmi did in his whole career. Every time I handed him
a page of copy, he ran o  with it as if his life depended on it. I can

still see Sammy racing between the desks, his tie  ying, wild-eyed,
desperate.

frantic puppy retrieving a ball. I never saw a guy work so hard for
twelve bucks a week in my life. You had to hand it to him. He might
not have been the most lovable little child in the world, but you
knew he must have something. I used to stop right in the middle of
a sentence and watch him go.

“Hey, kid, take it easy.”
That was like cautioning Niagara to fall more slowly.
“You said rush, Mr. Manheim.”
“I didn’t ask you to drop dead on us.”
“I don’t drop dead very easy, Mr. Manheim.”
“Like your job, Sammy?”
“It’s a damn good job—this year.”
“What do you mean—this year?”
“If I still have it next year, it’ll stink.”
He looked so tense and serious I almost laughed in his face. I liked

him. Maybe he was a little too fresh, but he was quite a boy.

years I’ll have a chance to slip you in as a cub reporter.”

That was the  rst time he ever scared me. Here I was going out of

my way to be nice to him and he answered me with a look that was
almost contemptuous.

know this newspaper racket. Couple of years at cub reporter?
Twenty bucks. Then another stretch as district man. Thirty- ve. And
 nally you’re a great big reporter and get forty- ve for the rest of
your life. No, thanks.”

I just stood there looking at him, staggered. Then …
“Hey, boy!” And he’s o  again, breaking the indoor record for the

hundred-yard dash.

Well, I guess he knew what he was doing. The world was a race to

Sammy. He was running against time. Sometimes I used to sit at the
bar at Bleeck’s, stare at the re ection in my highball glass and say,
“Al, I don’t give a goddam if you never move your ass o  this seat

again. If you never write another line. I default. If it’s a race, you
can scratch my name right now. Al Manheim does not choose to
run.” And then it would start running through my head: What
makes Sammy run? What makes Sammy run? I would take another
drink, and ask one of the bartenders:

“Say, Henry, what makes Sammy run?”
“What the hell are you talking about, Al?”
“I’m talking about Sammy Glick, that’s who I’m talking about.

What makes Sammy run?”

“You’re drunk, Al. Your teeth are swimming.”
“Goddam it, don’t try to get out of it! That’s an important

question. Now, Henry, as man to man, What makes Sammy run?”

Henry wiped his sweaty forehead with his sleeve. “Jesus, Al, how

the hell should I know?”

“But I’ve got to know. (I was yelling by this time.) Don’t you see,

it’s the answer to everything.”

But Henry didn’t seem to see.
“Mr. Manheim, you’re nuts,” he said sympathetically.
“It’s driving me nuts,” I said. “I guess it’s something for Karl Marx

or Einstein or a Big Brain; it’s too deep for me.”

drink.”

o ce with an awful load on. I had to bat out my column on what
seemed like six typewriters at the same time. And strangely enough
that’s how I had my  rst run-in with Sammy Glick.

o ce of O’Brien the managing editor and it headed straight for the
desk of the drama editor, which was me.

“Why in hell don’t you look what you’re doing, Manheim?”

O’Brien yelled.

The best I could do on the spur of the moment was:
“What’s eating you?”
“Nothing’s eating me,” he screamed. “But I know what’s eating

you—maggots—in your brain. Maybe you didn’t read your column
over before you  led it last night?”

at best I was always on the Milquetoast side. So I simply asked
meekly, “Why, was something wrong with it?”

“Nothing much,” he sneered in that terrible voice managing

editors always manage to cultivate. “Just one slight omission. You
left all the verbs out of the last paragraph. If it hadn’t been for that
kid Sammy Glick it would have run the way you wrote it.”

“What’s Sammy Glick got to do with it?” I demanded, getting

sore.

“Everything,” said the managing editor. “He read it on his way

down to the desk …”

“Glick read it?” I shouted.
“Shut up,” he said. “He read it on his way to the desk, and when

he saw that last paragraph he sat right down and re-wrote it
himself. And damn well, too.”

“That’s  ne,” I said. “He’s a great kid. I’ll have to thank him.”
“I thanked him in the only language he understands,” the editor

said, “with a pair for the Sharkey-Carnera scrap. And in your name.”

Samuel Glick himself.

“Nice work, Sammy,” I said.
“Oh, that’s all right, old man,” he said.
It was the  rst time he had ever called me anything but Mr.

Manheim.

stu , why didn’t you come and tell me? You always know where I
am.”

“Sure I did,” he said, “but I didn’t think we had time.”
“But you just had time to show it to the managing editor  rst,” I

said. “Smart boy.”

you.”

“You helped me,” I said. “The way Flit helps  ies.”
Ever since Sammy started working four or  ve months back he

had done a fairly conscientious job of sucking around me. He hardly
ever let a day go by without telling me how much he liked my

column, and of course I’d be  attered and give him pointers here
and there on his grammar, or what to read, or sometimes I’d slip
him a couple of tickets for a show and we’d talk it over and I’d  nd
myself listening to him give out with Glick on the Theater. Anyway,
he had played me for a good thing and always treated me with as
much respect as a fresh kid like that could, but right here, as I
watched that face, I actually felt I could see it change. The city
editor hadn’t hung a medal on his chest but he had put a glint in
Sammy’s eye. You could see he was so gaga about his success that
he didn’t care how sore I was. That was the beginning.

“You might hit somebody down below.”

when you’re running so fast?”

so fast. Errands.”

and he spun around and started running. What makes Sammy run? I
pondered, looking after him, what makes Sammy run?

For the next couple of months Sammy and I didn’t have much to do
with each other. I thought maybe by being tough I could teach him
a lesson. I’d just hand him copy without looking up, and I quit
trying to develop his mind. But after a while that began to seem a
little silly. After all, here I was a grown-up drama editor having a
peeve on a poor kid who was just trying to get along. It wasn’t
digni ed. So next time he stopped by I suggested that we bury the
hatchet.

“Two bits says I know where you’d like to bury it,” Sammy said

—“in my head.”

I had to admit that was quite a temptation, but I managed to

overcome it. I guess I’ve always been a gentle soul at heart. I’ve
never been able to walk past a street  ght between two little
newsboys out to murder each other over a three-cent controversy

without trying to stop it. On o  moments when I wasn’t drunk or
working hard I suppose you would have to call me an idealist. I’m
not boasting about this. In this world which is run with all the rules
and restrictions of a rough-and-ready free-for-all, it is always a little
embarrassing to  nd yourself still believing in such outmoded
principles as the golden rule and brotherly love.

So I began piously, “Now, Sammy, after all, I’m almost old

enough to be your father …”

as you when he kicked the bucket  ve years ago.”

But I’ll bet I know what he’d say if he saw you today. He’d say,
‘Sammy, in the long run you’ll get further by being nice to people
because then when you need them, they’ll be nice to you.’ ”

You should have seen Sammy’s face laughing at me. “Mr.

Manheim,” he said, “that spiel really rings the bell on my old man.
That’s what he’d be telling me, all right. Because you want to know
what my old man croaked from? Dumbness.”

“That’s a  ne way to talk about your father,” I said.
“Can I help it if that’s what he died of?” Sammy asked. “He didn’t

know enough to come in out of the rain and he died of a disease
that seems to run in my family—dumbness.”

“That diagnosis doesn’t sound exactly scienti c,” I said.
“To hell with science,” he said. “All I know is that my old man

kicked o  because his brains were muscle-bound, and my old lady
and my half-brained brother su er from the same thing.”

Jewish families are pretty strong on  lial love, but Sammy wasn’t
what you’d call a loving son. So I switched to my sociological
approach.

“Sammy,” I began wisely, “society isn’t just a bunch of individuals

living alongside of each other. As a member of society, man is
interdependent. Not independent, Sammy, interdependent. Life is too
complex for there to be any truth in the old slogan of every man for
himself. We share the bene ts of social institutions, like take
hospitals, the cops and garbage collection. Why, the art of

conversation itself is a social invention. We can’t live in this world
like a lot of cannibals trying to swallow each other. Learn to give
the other fellow a break and we’ll all live longer.”

convinced that it was one of the most sensible things I had ever
said. But I might as well have been talking to a stone wall. In fact
that might have been better. At least it couldn’t talk back.

Sammy’s answer was, “If you want to save souls, try China.”
I suppose the reason Sammy was getting my goat was because he

was the smartest and stupidest human being I had ever met. He had
a quick intelligence, which he was able to use exclusively for the
good-and-welfare of Sammy Glick. And that kind of intelligence
implies stupidity, for where other people might have one blind spot,
Sammy’s mind was a mass of blind spots, with only a single ray of
light focused immediately ahead.

down with kindness. I had two for Of Thee I Sing, so I gave them to
him and told him to take his mother or his girl.

“Girl,” he sneered, “you don’t see me with any girl.”
“That’s a terrible loss to the opposite sex,” I said.
“What good would a girl do me?” he said. “All they do is take up

time and dough, and then if they happen to get knocked up they go
yelling for their mothers.”

“In other words,” I said, “you’re above sex?”
“Hell, no,” he said, “I’ve got a pal who gets me  xed up every

Saturday night. Gratis.”

“Isn’t it romantic?” I sang the words of a current song. “Now that

we’ve got that settled, do you still want the ducats? Take ’em home
and surprise your mother.”

ever got to a real show was hearing the cantor sing ‘Eli Eli.’ ”

fun you can have in the world is showing people who aren’t used to
it a good time.”

Hebes I know drive me nuts because they always go around trying

to be so goddam kind. It ain’t natural.”

“Remember what I told you,” I said. “Don’t say ‘ain’t’ or you’ll be

an o ce boy forever.”

“Fat chance,” Sammy said, and hurried o .
When I saw Sammy the next day he didn’t even mention the

show, so I  nally had to ask him.

“I didn’t expect you to thank me for those tickets,” I said, “but I

thought you might tell me what you thought of it.”

“Good show,” he said.
“Good show,” I screamed. “One of the greatest American plays

ever written and all you can say is, ‘good show!’ ”

“I wouldn’t mind having half of what Kaufman and Ryskind

have,” he added.

That’s a little more like it, I thought. “I’d settle for half their talent

myself,” I said.

“I don’t mean talent,” Sammy said. “I mean pro t. That show

must be cleaning up.”

“Go on, beat it,” I said. “Disappear.”
A little later I happened to meet one of the rewrite men, Osborne,

at the water cooler. He was a sweet old gray-haired duck who was
gradually working his way down from the hundred-a-week ace
reporter he had been before the War.

“Hello, Osborne,” I said, “I thought you were going to drop

around when you wanted a couple of tickets for some musical. The
o er still goes.”

the little woman just took one in ourselves. Last night as a matter of
fact.”

“What did you do that for?” I said. “Two seats at the box o ce

must have set you back plenty.”

“As a matter of fact,” Osborne said, “it isn’t as bad as it sounds. I

happened to get a bargain on two seats right up in front. And since
it happened to be our twenty-seventh anniversary, I thought it
wouldn’t hurt to splurge.”

“Someone bootlegging in the lobby?” I said.

I think. Sold me the two of ’em for four bucks.”

That made me burn. Four dollars was a lot of money to Osborne.
I didn’t wait to run into Sammy again. I sent for him as soon as I

got back to my desk.

“So you thought the show last night was pretty good,” I began.
“I’ve seen worse,” Sammy said.
“I didn’t know you were such a tough critic, Mr. Glick,” I said.

“You make George Jean Nathan sound like a blurb writer.”

“I just know what I like,” Sammy said.
“That’s quite a trick,” I said, “knowing what you like without even

having to see it.”

“What do you mean haven’t seen?” Sammy said in a tone of

injured belligerence.

been talking with Osborne.”

insults and embarrassment like a sponge was turning out to be one
of his greatest accomplishments.

your feelings.”

“Don’t be so goddam thoughtful,” I said. “If you didn’t want to see

the show, why didn’t you tell me?”

explained. “So instead of wasting them I gave them to Osborne.”

“There was nothing wrong with that,” I said. “Except for one little

detail. You didn’t give those tickets to Osborne. You soaked him
four bucks for them.”

“That’s one way of looking at it,” Sammy said. “On the other hand

you could say I saved him the three and a half more he’d’ve had to
pay at the box o ce.”

it. Why, there’s even a law against pro teering on complimentary
tickets. You could go to jail for this.”

said. “Don’t shoot. I’ll come quietly.”

picked his pocket,” I said sternly. “Why don’t you be a good kid and
pay him back? He’s having his troubles, too.”

it’s too late now. I spent it.”

guess he must have because I found myself staring at them too. They
were brand new the way only shoes can be new, sti  and shiny and
still in the window. They were a highly polished yellow-brown
leather that made up in gloss what it lacked in quality, small neat
shoes that came to a point too stylishly narrow for everyday use.

“So those are the shoes I gave you,” I said.
“They were on sale down at Hearns,” he said, with no hint of

apology. In fact, he seemed really proud of what he had done. He
looked down at his shoes, reveling in their newness and added, “You
know what, Mr. Manheim, these are the  rst brand-new shoes I ever
had. It’s about time, too. I was fed up with wearing my brother’s
hand-me-downs.”

“Sammy,” I said, “for Christ’s sake, if you needed shoes that bad

you could have told me. I’m not exactly Rockefeller, but I’m always
good for a little touch if it means going without shoes.”

“Thanks,” Sammy said, “but you never  nd me going in for

favors. I found out long ago that was a sucker’s trick. It leaves you
wide open. This way you’re sore for a while and I don’t owe you
nothing.”

“Don’t owe me anything,” I said. “When are you going to learn

two negatives cancel each other? If you don’t owe me nothing that
means you do owe me something.”

“O.K.,” Sammy said agreeably, “so I don’t owe you anything.”
I gave up. It was like trying to convince Capone to exchange his

machine guns for water pistols. I simply became resigned. It was just
as if a wildcat were loose in the o ce and if I happened to see it
crouching on the water cooler I would say to myself that new
copyreader certainly looks queer. Only Sammy Glick was a much
more predatory animal than any wildcat. For a long time I thought
that the phenomenon of Sammy Glick was my own little secret, but

after a while I began to  nd that the whole o ce was afraid of him.
I know that sounds wacky. Hardened newspapermen being afraid of
a snot-nosed little o ce boy? But that’s really what it added up to.
Even Osborne, the Christ-like rewrite man who always had a good
word for everybody, con ded to me one day, “I don’t know what it
is about that kid, he’s a hard worker and I think he’s good to his
mother but he gives me the creeps.”

boiled journalistic bosses to the best of his loud-mouthed and
soulless ability put it this way:

“I’d kick his little ass for him—if he’d only leave it in one place

long enough.”

“If he gripes you that much why don’t you can him instead of

wanting to hand him a raise?” I said heartlessly, though I knew my
conscience wouldn’t keep me up nights because there must have
been thousands of kids in the city waiting to step into his job and I
had seen enough of Sammy not to have to worry about his ever
starving to death.

just as much as you do, but I’m not running a popularity contest; I’m
running a business o ce and Sammy’s strength as a copy boy is as
the strength of ten.”

another worm you haven’t got the heart to step on. What the hell
makes you think he’s big enough to make me waste my time and
energy hating him?”

“If he matters that little, why in hell are you getting your bowels

in an uproar?” he asked me, and I had to admit that the logic of that
stopped me cold.

every method I could think of to overcome him. I had tried fatherly
criticism. I had guided him with the impersonal and professional
tolerance the master craftsman shows the apprentice. I had humored
him. I had patronized him with sermons on the goodness of man. I
had insulted him. I had given him the silent treatment. I had
smothered him with kindness. I had used psychology and I had

resorted to frenzied ridicule. Once I had even taken a poke at him.
And after twelve months of Sammy Glick I was still behind the eight
ball. I can’t exactly explain it, but every time I looked at him now I
got a crazy helpless feeling, the way you feel in drunken dreams
when the Phantom of the Opera is coming after you and the faster
you try to get away from him the more you run toward him. I
couldn’t understand it. In the  rst place I hadn’t even  gured him
out, and in the second place I couldn’t understand why I felt I had to
 gure out an inconspicuous little copy boy, and in the third place I
couldn’t  gure out why I gave a damn in the  rst two places. I know
that sounds nuts now but that’s the condition I was in when Sammy
was running my tail into the ground.

Sammy seemed to be absolutely blooming. Without giving an inch
in the personal tug of war he was waging with the world, he was
coming into maturity. Only it wasn’t what is generally thought of as
maturity. It was his own special brand, Sammyglick maturity. No
mellowing, no deepening of understanding. Maturity to Sammy
merely meant a quickening and a strengthening of the rhythm of
behavior that was beginning to disconcert everybody who came in
contact with it. Because he seemed to escape all of the doubts, the
pimpled sensitivity, the introspection, the mental and physical
growing pains of adolescence, he was able to throw o  his youth
and take on the armor of young manhood with the quick-changing
ease of a chorus girl. His alert little ferret face began to take more
de nite form, the thin neat lips permanently set, the nose growing
larger but still straight and sharp, giving the lie to the hook-nosed
anti-Semitic cartoons, a nose that teamed up with the quick dark
eyes and the tense, lined forehead to give an impression of
arrogance and a  erce aggressiveness, which, when you included
the determination of the pointed, forward-thrust chin, produced a
face that reminded you of an army, full of force, strategy, single will
and the kind of courage that boasts of never taking a backward step.

The  rst sure sign I had of Sammy’s growing up was when he came
to me with the announcement that he now felt himself ready to
conduct the paper’s radio column. Of course, the fact that the paper
had never had a radio column didn’t seem to discourage him in the
least.

on matters Marconi?” I said.

“What made you think you were an expert on the theater?” he

said.

That made me pause.
“That’s got absolutely nothing to do with it,” I said. “I had plenty

of reasons.”

“Name one,” said Sammy.
I don’t know why the hell I was letting a twelve-buck-a-week half-

pint bulldoze me, but there I was. “Well, for one thing,” I said, “I
always liked the theater. I’ve seen lots of plays.”

“Well, I’ve listened to the radio plenty too,” Sammy said.
“That doesn’t mean anything,” I said. “Everybody listens to the

radio.”

“That’s why there oughta be a radio column,” Sammy said.
It struck me funny. Here was this o ce boy applying for the job

of writing a radio column that didn’t exist, and he actually had me
on the defensive.

interrupting me in the middle of my work to ask me a thing like
that?”

“O.K.,” Sammy said, “go ahead and put your own sel sh interest

ahead of the paper’s good.”

It made just enough sense to exasperate me into going on. That

was getting to be one of Sammy’s favorite tricks. He could go so far
that your curiosity was pricked because you wouldn’t believe
anybody could get that brazen.

So instead of simply giving him his walking papers the way I

should have, I accepted the challenge. “What are you talking about,
the good of the paper?” I said. “What’s the good of the paper got to
do with it?”

“You know the paper needs a radio column,” Sammy said. “But

you’re such a dog in the manger you’re afraid it might cut into your
column and that’s why you’re against it.”

said. “Everybody knows the old man doesn’t want it because he says
why should we plug a setup that’s cutting our advertising.”

“But millions of people are listening in all day long,” Sammy

argued. “That’d mean new readers for the Record. And I’ll bet the
column would land us plenty of radio ads. So if you’d put in a good
word for me with the boss …”

doubt. In the  rst place, I don’t care about radio columns, and in the
second place, there are half a dozen boys I could name in this o ce
I’d give the job to before you, and in the third place, even if you
were the radio master mind of the century I’d be damned if I’d help
you get it, and in the fourth place—or have you had enough
places?”

“I don’t know,” Sammy said. “I guess if you’ve heard one place

you’ve heard them all.”

Three or four weeks later I was sitting around in Bleeck’s one

night with the boys after turning in my column.

The telephone rang and Henry answered it and said it was for me.

“It’s your pal, Sammy Glick,” Henry said.

“Good evening, young man,” I said, feeling mellow on four or  ve

highballs.

“It’s a good evening for me all right,” Sammy said. “But I don’t

know about you, Mr. Manheim.”

I didn’t like the tone of that “Mr. Manheim.”
“What’s up?” I said.
“Your dinner,” Sammy said, “when you hear what’s happened.”
For a moment or two it was touch and go as to whether or not I

burst a blood vessel right there in front of all my friends.

“Come on, spill it, you punk,” I said. I was so sore I was talking

like a gangster in the movies.

“The boss says your column is two sticks short,” Sammy said.

down to grab a couple of drinks before wrapping it up. Tell him he
can stop worrying. I’ll be right up.”

either. Everything’s under control. I took care of it.”

stupidly. I knew he had me. I could tell.

“Sure, Al,” he said, just as if he had always called me Al. “I

dashed o  a four-inch radio column to  ll, and the boss liked it.”

“Oh, he’s seen it already!” I said. “Then why the hell did you

bother to call me? Why the hell don’t you just take over my
column? Why the hell …?”

“I just wanted to help you,” Sammy said simply.
“Sure,” I said, “Joe Altruist,” and I hung up.
That night I dreamt about Sammy Glick. I dreamt I was working

in my o ce, minding my own business and peacefully writing my
column, when all of a sudden I looked up and screamed. Everybody
in the o ce looked like Sammy Glick. There must have been thirty
or forty of them, and every time one of them passed me he’d say,
“Hello, Al, I’m the new drama editor”; or “Hello, Al, I’m the new
city editor”; or “Hello, Al, allow me to introduce myself, your new
publisher, S. Glick,” and,  nally, when I couldn’t stand it any more,
I started to run, with all the Sammy Glicks behind me and I got into
the elevator just in time and heaved a sigh of relief when, so help
me God, who do I see driving the elevator but Sammy Glick, and
when I  nally get out onto the street, sure enough there’s nobody
but Sammy Glick waiting for me, thousands of Sammy Glicks all
running after me.

It was a relief to wake up, because I  gured that nothing that ever

happened between me and Sammy could top that one. From now on
Sammy Glick was sure to be an anti-climax and I was saved. That
just goes to show you how little I still knew about my friend Glick.

The pay-o  began next morning when the managing editor

hovered over my shoulder just after I had started my column.

“From now on write it thirty lines shorter all the time,” he said in

the same tone of voice he’d ask for a stick of gum.

“What do you mean thirty lines shorter?” I said.
“I mean,” he explained, “that from now on it should be thirty

lines not as long as you’ve been writing it.”

“This is a little sudden,” I said, “but it’s O.K. by me if you can give

me one good reason why this amputation’s necessary.”

“From now on we’re using Sammy Glick’s radio column.”

“You mean Sammy Glick the copy boy?” I said.
“No, I mean Sammy Glick the radio columnist,” he said. “His stu 

looked all right today.”

paragraph from Somerset Maugham?”

“Maybe that’s where you need to go for your stu ,” he said.
So that’s how Sammy got his start. It was hard to believe, but you

didn’t have to pinch yourself to know you weren’t dreaming. All you
had to do was turn to the amusement page of the Record, and there
we were, side by side, “Down Broadway” by Al Manheim and
“Sammy Glick Broadcasting.” I always suspected that Sammy sold
the editor that title so his name could be in fatter type than any by-
line could possibly be. That may not be one of the things you or I
would think of doing but it meant plenty to Sammy.

The funny part of it was the kid’s stu  wasn’t bad. He was just

smart enough never to crib from the same writer twice. He was glib.
When it came to wisecracks he rolled his own. I had gone through
so many emotions with Sammy that I felt as if I had to have my
emotional valves ground but now I was reaching the stage of
loathing him so much I was beginning to admire him. Every other
copy boy in the place was just a nice guy. At least if you bent over,
they’d ask you to stand up and turn around before stabbing you. But
Sammy Glick was teaching me something about the world. Of
course, I hadn’t found out what made him run, and, lucky for him, I
had no idea just where he was running. And if I had, I suppose I
might have spent the rest of my life serving time for committing
premeditated mayhem. And I suppose there’s no use kidding myself.
Somehow Sammy would have capitalized on that as he did

everything else. It looked as if Sammy Glick had the drop on this
world.

overheard. He always managed to get on the inside with the key
secretaries. He had a well-developed talent for squeezing news out
of victims by pretending he already had it. He had no qualms about
prominently featuring what he knew to be lies and then printing the
truth a day or so later in an inconspicuous retraction at the bottom
of the column.

thing. For instance, if some big shot happened to demand a
correction, Sammy would call him by some private nickname and
say, “Sorry, Jock,” or “Pudge” or “Deac, thanks for the help.” He
learned to play all but the most complex and suspicious minds like a
harp. He pumped and he promised and he did small favors. He
managed to get near the best of them and he picked up much of his
hot news from the worst. He overcame the fact that he had
absolutely no literary ability whatsoever by inventing a lingo which
everyone mistook for a fresh and unique style when it was really
plain unadulterated illiteracy. But all of these achievements were
overshadowed by one stupendous talent; his ability to blow his own
horn. He blew it so loud, so long, and so often, that nobody believed
all that sound could possibly emanate from one person and so
everyone really began to believe that Sammy Glick’s name was on
everyone else’s lips.

(though I always suspected him of tying these together conveniently
to make a better story) the anniversary of “Sammy Glick
Broadcasting.”

I hadn’t been on exactly chummy terms with Sammy for quite a

time now but one afternoon he came up to me at Bleeck’s and,
without taking his ten-cent cigar out of his mouth (this was a new
addition to the evolving personality of Sammy Glick), he said,
“Hello, Al, can I buy you a drink?”

I didn’t like the idea of his buying me a drink, so I o ered to play

him the match game to see who got the check and I lost. There’s no

use making myself out a hero about this. I was pretty generally
considered the King of the Match Game down at Bleeck’s and I
didn’t like the way Sammy was starting to beat me.

too quick for me.

sorta gave me my start I thought maybe you’d like to have dinner
with me and my girl, at the Algonquin.”

canned.”

birthday parties are old-fashioned, but I want you with us at dinner
Monday night.”

“Monday night?” I said. “Sorry, Sammy, I’m a working man; I’ve

got a show Monday night.”

to  nd one.

“Then how about Sunday?” Sammy said.
“Well, it’s more fun to have your party on your actual birthday,” I

said, “so why don’t you just go ahead without me? I’ll—sort of be
there in spirit,” I added, a little lamely.

But Sammy always was too practical to go in for anything as

philosophical as that. “No,” he insisted, “I wouldn’t think of having
my party without my old pal Al, so I’ll just change it to Sunday
night.”

We met in the Algonquin lobby. Sammy was standing with a

spindly-legged, too thin, sickly-pale, vague little girl. She could have
looked like an angel, only her face was made up like a Fourteenth
Street chorus girl, heavy red lipstick and eye shadow and too much
powder and orange rouge. I wanted to take my handkerchief and
wipe it all o . The poor little kid. The blue eyes and the frail body
and the sad beauty were hers. They grew out of the shadow of the
tenement right up through the crowded sidewalk.

“Miss Rosalie Goldbaum,” Sammy said, “meet Mr. Al Manheim,

who has the column next to mine.”

Goldbaum said.

Sammy took Miss Goldbaum’s arm and mine and guided us

through the lobby to the restaurant. He caught the headwaiter’s eye
with an air of practiced authority. He smiled down his cigar. For the
occasion he had bought himself a new pair of $7.50 black  anged
shoes at the London Character Shop.

busy looking around for celebrities to pay much attention to either
of us. Miss Goldbaum was shy, strangely unsophisticated, full of self-
conscious smiles and silence. Except when she talked about Sammy.
And I encouraged her. For her heart was so full of Sammy that I
began to wonder if I had overlooked one of his virtues. Perhaps this
was another side; he was a kind and thoughtful lover and slowed
down to a walk for Miss Goldbaum.

what Sammy really wants to do.”

“Of course not,” I said, “they forced it on him.”
“He just does that to make a living,” she said.
“It’s a damn shame,” I said, “this materialistic world crushing a

beautiful soul like that.”

“It really is,” she said. “Because he writes me the loveliest things.

I just know that some day he’s going to be a really great writer.
Because he’s really a poet.”

second. “You’re a lucky girl.”

“You’re telling me,” she said.
There was a lull. Sammy was staring across the room at George

Opdyke, the three-time Pulitzer Prize winner. I was about to say he
was lost in thought, but Sammy was never really lost, and he never
actually thought, for that implies deep re ection. He was  guring.
Miss Goldbaum edged her undernourished white hand into his.
Sammy played with it absent-mindedly, like a piece of silverware.

“Gee,” Miss Goldbaum burst out again, “honestly, sometimes

when I look at Sammy I just can’t believe it, and him just a little kid
right out of the East Side like me.”

feebly with, “Yeah—a diamond in the rough.”

with Sammy Glick. All her craving to live and her blood rushing to
possess and to be maternal found expression in this one smart little
guy. I wondered if she had known Sammy that time a year or so ago
when he had proudly pronounced his independence of all women,
except for what he could get gratis on Saturday nights.

I liked her and pitied her and didn’t want to hear her any more.
About that time Opdyke had  nished his co ee and was passing

our table and just at the moment that I was going to nod to him, for
I knew him slightly, Sammy suddenly surprised me in a loud voice:

“Hey, Al, I thought you said you were going to introduce me to

Opdyke.”

too late because Opdyke had already stopped the way anyone does
when he hears his name. He paused a moment, just long enough for
me to get the introduction out and Sammy had had his way again.

Miss Goldbaum looked at Opdyke with some reproach, as if to

say, You can’t horn in on this, it’s our birthday party.

But you should have seen Sammy go to work. He o ered Opdyke

a cigar and said, “I sent you a column of mine a couple of months
ago giving you a pretty good plug. I always wondered how you liked
it.”

you,” he said, “I get quite a few clippings in the mail.”

did was give Sammy a better idea of how to proceed.

“You know, Mr. Opdyke,” he said, “I was always hoping I could

meet you so I could tell you how much I liked The Eleventh
Commandment.”

thought everybody had forgotten that little one-acter. I wrote
Eleventh Commandment when I was just getting started.”

how it stands up.”

“Is that a fact?” Opdyke said, rather pleased.
I could see what Sammy was doing and I had to hand it to him. If

there’s anything every successful writer loves, it’s to hear praise for
some obscure failure which he is still convinced is one of the best
things he ever wrote. That was Opdyke’s Achilles’ heel, just the way
it probably was Dreiser’s and Shaw’s and Sinclair Lewis’s, and
Sammy had found it.

The next thing I knew Opdyke was actually sitting down with us.

“This protégé of yours is a real student of the American theater, Al,”
he said.

Protégé. I winced. And I didn’t have the heart to tell him what I

was beginning to realize: that Sammy, knowing that Opdyke usually
hangs out at the Algonquin, had probably been doing a little
research on the playwright at the public library.

For the next  fteen minutes, Sammy was in his element, busy

being sophisticated and arti cially gay, trying his best to outwise-
crack Opdyke.
After Opdyke left, with a hearty Glad-to-have-met-you for Sammy,
Miss Goldbaum started to yawn and I mumbled something about
having a lot of work to do before hitting the hay, and Sammy
looked at Miss Goldbaum and said, “We both appreciate your
celebrating this way with us.” She nodded happily. Yes, her Sammy
said it exactly right, and the birthday party was over. The last I saw
of them they were walking down the steps to the subway arm in
arm and she was looking up at him. He was nineteen years old.

On the way home I stopped in “21” and had a drink by myself,
somehow hoping to  nd the answer to Sammy Glick at the bottom
of my glass. I didn’t want to hate Sammy too quickly because I
wasn’t a hater by nature. I usually tried to  nd some reason for
liking everybody. That had always been my favorite luxury in life,
being able to like everybody. I suppose that could be traced back to
my heritage, in a small New England town where life was always

peaceful and friendly, and where my father, the town’s only rabbi,
had led a life of community service and true Isaiah-like vision that
had won him Middletown’s approval and genuine respect. When I
enrolled at the good little Methodist college in our town, I still
expected to follow my father’s footsteps and go on to rabbinical
school, but four active and enthusiastic years in college dramatics
changed my mind for me and that’s how I happened to wind up in
front of the footlights instead of the altar. My father’s life message
of tolerance was imbedded too deeply in the undersoil of my
adolescence for any Broadway cynicism to wipe away entirely, and
sometimes at the most ridiculous moments the words of my father
would return to me, phrased in the digni ed Biblical language that
had become his everyday speech, though I believe the wording was
his own: “Try to love all your fellow men as you do your own
brother, for the Lord placed all men upon the earth that they might
prosper together.”

So that’s what I sat there saying to myself that night as I downed

my Scotch and tried my very best to love Sammy Glick along with
all the rest of my fellow men. Under the potent in uence of Scotch
and my father I began to feel downright repentant. Almost maudlin,
in fact. Here he was a young kid just trying to get a good job and
now that he had got it and was beginning to grow up he’d have a
chance to relax and become one of the boys. Manheim, get a grip on
yourself, I cautioned myself unsteadily. Stop seeing dark clouds
behind every silver lining. You’re going to love Sammy Glick,
Manheim, I lectured, you’re going to remember what your dear
dead father told you and love Sammy Glick even if it kills you. Why,
Sammy’s hospitality tonight is a beautiful gesture. It’s the beginning
of a golden friendship.

by that time, and then too when it came to a knowledge of Sammy
Glick I was still in the  rst grade.
But I skipped a couple of grades after I saw Winchell’s column next
evening. There it was, right at the top, the boldface print laughing
up at me:

When rising columnist Sammy Glick celebrated his twenty- rst

birthday at the Algonquin last night, George Opdyke and

colleague Al Manheim were on hand as principal cake eaters  …

You didn’t have to be a mastermind to  gure out how Walter

got that item, or where those two extra years came from. So when
Sammy blew into the o ce I gave him one of my searching looks.
“I see where George Opdyke got himself a plug in Winchell’s

column this morning, Samuel,” I said.

“Yeah,” Sammy cracked, “you should have been there.”
“Listen,” I said, “you’ve got enough gall to be divided into nine

parts.”

“Aw, don’t be sore, Al,” he said. “I can’t hide in this nest forever. I

gotta spread my wings a little.”

“Then you must be a bat,” I said, “because that’s the only rat I

know of with wings.”

“Why, Al,” Sammy said, “I’m surprised at you. I always thought

you were my friend.”

He really meant it too. Trying to hurt his feelings was like trying

to shoot an elephant with a BB gun. It simply tickled him.

“You’re physically incapable of having friends,” I said. “All you

can ever have are enemies and stooges.”

That rolled o  my tongue just like that, without thinking much

about it, but I remember looking back on it in later life as one of my
few profound observations.

“Sammy,” I continued, “try to learn before it’s too late. Don’t be

cheap. Cheapness is the curse of our times. You’re beginning to
spread cheapness around like bad toilet water. That item about
George Opdyke’s celebrating your birthday was one of the cheapest
things I ever saw.”

“Sure, it was cheap,” Sammy said. “After all, I got better publicity

free than you could have bought for big dough. You can’t ask for
anything cheaper than that. And what are you squawking about? It
didn’t do you any harm either.”

“You don’t have to convince me,” I said. “I know you’re a

philanthropist. But while you were about it why didn’t you mention

Miss Goldbaum? She’s the only one who would have got any joy out
of seeing her name linked with yours in print. Why didn’t you give
her a break?”

“Wise up,” he cracked, “she gets her break three times a week.”
“You—stink,” I ended lamely, so sore I couldn’t even try to be

clever.

an arm for one little whi .”

OceanofPDF.com

For the next few weeks I tried to avoid Sammy, even though he had
his desk in the adjoining cubicle. I was beginning to wonder if this
o ce wasn’t too small for the two of us, and I was afraid to put that
suspicion to the test for fear of losing the best job I’d ever had. Of
course, all that time I knew I was living in a fool’s paradise because
nobody on earth could sit within ten or twelve feet of Sammy day
after day without becoming emotionally involved in some
unexpected phase of his activity.

One day a frightened young man with an unassuming, intelligent,

unhandsome face behind glasses came in with a manuscript under
his arm and inquired for Mr. Glick in a voice quavering with
inferiority.

He said his name was Julian Blumberg and he had a small job in

our advertising department, and, and his life’s ambition was to
become a writer and, and, er—he had written a radio script and,
and, er—er since Mr. Glick was such an expert on radio writing,
would he be so kind as to read Blumberg’s manuscript?

I expected Sammy in his own pungent vernacular to go into the

physiological details of where Mr. Blumberg could dispose of his
manuscript, but Sammy was playing a new role today, and that’s
what made me sneak up and grab a choice seat in the orchestra.
Sammy had decided to be  attered.

“I should be very happy to help you,” he said, in a new and

di erent tone.

That was one of the moments when I could feel something

happening to him, a new step, something big. So help me God, I
could feel something loud and strong pumping inside that little guy,
like a piston, twisting him up and forcing him on.

Sammy sat down and read his stu . He was smiling when he turned
the  rst page, and when he hit the third page he laughed out loud.

him or not), “this is good stu , funny as hell.”

“Mmmmmmm,” I said.
He read through the rest of it, laughing and loudly commenting,

and then, never being able to keep anything to himself, he popped
over to my desk and slapped Blumberg’s manuscript down.

“Whataya know about that?” he said. “A brand-new angle.”
“Yeah?” I said doubtfully. “What’s it about?”
“It’s a comedy with a helluva twist in it,” Sammy said. “It starts

out where the guy won’t have anything to do with the dame. So she
kidnaps him. But he still says no dice and gets her arrested. In court
it looks like curtains for her till they clinch and decide to get
married, which saves the dame, because he’s the only witness and a
guy can’t testify against his own wife. Pretty nifty, huh?”

 nd Sammy so interested in somebody else’s work and I told him so.

“Say, that’s nothing,” Sammy said, “I even have a better ending

for him. The same Judge that was going to sentence her suggests
that he have the honor of marrying her. So they hold the wedding
right in court, and how’s this for the last line: the Judge says, ‘Case
dismissed.’ ”

“Yeah,” I said, “that’s swell, but I don’t see what it adds up to for

you.”

“Oh,” he said, “I’m not thinking about myself. I just like to see a

young kid get ahead.”

That was all I needed to watch the further development of the

Blumberg-Glick a air with suspicious interest.

Sammy Glick’s pale young genius returned the following week.

Sammy shook his hand  rmly, but I noticed that he didn’t exactly
boil over with enthusiasm as he had with me.

“You have an idea here,” he admitted to the poor guy. “Of course

it’s rough and it needs developing, but maybe with a little work we
could  x it up.”

“You mean you’ll help me?” said the dope.
“I think I can pull something out of it,” Sammy said modestly,

“and then I’ll give it to my agent.”

“Say, I didn’t expect all this,” the dope said.
I thought Mr. Blumberg was going to break down and fall on

Sammy’s neck for joy. I never saw a man so pleased about getting
chiseled in all my life.

When the guy had gone, practically bowing out backwards,

Sammy turned to me and said, “Say, Al, who’s a good agent for
me?”

in on Mr. Blumberg’s perfectly good story. Then I hear you tell him
you’ve got an agent.”

But Sammy was in no mood for cross-examination. This was the

chance he knew he had been waiting for and he was as preoccupied
as a good quarterback  guring out the next play.

good for radio. I’m going to sell it to Hollywood. I even got the title
all doped out: Girl Steals Boy.”

“As soon as the agents hear you’re interested in Hollywood, they’ll

be coming at you from all sides,” I said, trying to keep a straight
face. “But you might do worse than Myron Selznick.”

pass all too quickly.

“I think so,” I said. “At least he’s good enough for Carole

Lombard, William Powell, Norma Shearer and a couple of dozen
other stars.”

“Is he any good with stories?” Sammy asked.
“Pretty fair,” I said. “He’s supposed to average a couple of grand a

week out of them.”

“Maybe I’ll give him a try,” said Sammy.
“Why, Sammy,” I said, “I never heard you so retiring before. I’m

sure Myron Selznick will never forgive you when he hears how you
hesitated about giving him your business. If I were you, I’d put in a
long-distance call to him right now.”

can I reach him?” he asked.

“Myron Selznick and Company, Beverly Hills, California, is all you

need,” I said.

more serious in his brief, serious career. “By God, Al,” he said
tensely, “I think you’ve given me an idea.”

Then, while my face must have drained white with shock and

disbelief, I was privileged to overhear one of the most astounding
conversations in the history of the telephone.

with Mr. Myron Selznick in Beverly Hills, California, person-to-
person.”

he too intense and I too stunned. I just looked into his face, waited
for his voice and wondered. His face was beginning to settle into a
permanent sneer. I had begun to hear it in his voice too, an
incredible contempt for other human beings, not only for those like
me, the secretaries, the copy boys and the men on the sta  who
were unfortunate enough to be his everyday acquaintances, but for
strangers too, the back of a taxi driver’s neck at which he yelled
instructions, people he pushed out of the way in a crowd, the
anonymous operator just now …

at every new station, but there was something more, some angry,
volcanic force erupting and over owing deep within him.

“Hello, Mr. Selznick? This is Mr. Glick calling from New York …
“Sammy Glick! I just wanted to let you know I’ve decided to let

you handle my story …

plenty …

“Don’t give me that maybe stu . The most sure re story sale

that’s come to Hollywood in years, and he tells me maybe. Well, I’ve
got a couple of maybes of my own, Mr. Selznick. Maybe I won’t
even show you that story. Maybe I’ll give another agency  rst crack
at it instead …

jokes, I suppose. Well, if that’s the way you feel. Good-bye …

send it to you until you show a little more interest …

“Oh, that’s di erent. But you’ve got to read it as soon as you get

it. Because the idea is so hot I don’t want to give anybody time to
steal it …

it. Call me collect here at the Record, if you don’t like the expense …

“Now you’re talking my language. Girl Steals Boy will be on your

desk the day after tomorrow. So long, Myron.”

his forehead. Then he put his handkerchief back in his pocket, took
it out again and wiped his head some more.

 nal bell.

I stared at him. I felt as I did when I stared at a photograph of the

man who walked across Niagara Falls on a tightrope. With such a
stunt I could have absolutely no sympathy, yet I was held fascinated
by its crazy boldness. In Sammy was everything I hated most:
dishonesty, o ciousness, bullying. But I felt I wasn’t only staring at
him with dislike, I was staring at him with actual awe for the
magnitude of his blustering.

He sat there smiling as I came over to him.
“Sammy, were you scared?”
I asked him that because the phone call was completely outside

my sphere of experience. It was like asking a man how it felt to start
out in a rocket to the moon. Even though super cially we were
similar, both columnists, both Jewish, both men, both American
citizens, both awake for the same brief moment in world time, I
stared at Sammy now, asked my question and waited for the answer
like a mystic trying to reach another world.

“Sammy, were you scared?”
“It’s a funny thing, Al,” Sammy said in the most quiet voice I had

ever heard in him, “I’m scared now, all right. Goddam scared. I got

scared the second I hung up. But I wasn’t scared when I called him. I
didn’t even think about being scared.”

I leaned forward. I felt closer to him than I ever had before. For

just a moment his guard was down.

“What were you thinking about, Sammy?”
He murmured as if he were talking to himself.
“I was just thinking about me. I just kept thinking nothing but me.

I just kept saying Sammyglicksammyglick over and over inside my
head and it kept growing louder SAMMYGLICKSAMMYGLICKSAMMYGLICK. I guess
that don’t quite make sense, does it?”

Oh, yes, I thought to myself; oh, yes, that makes sense all right. It

makes the most fearful horrible frightening sense I ever heard.

Sammy rose and snapped out of it.
“Come on down to Bleeck’s,” he said. “I’ll beat the pants o  you

in the match game.”

“The hell you will,” I said, and we walked down together and he

beat me. And, as we played and drank together, I kept wishing I
could really hate him because I was in no-man’s-land now and there
was a terrible sense of frustration about not being able to hate him
as much as he deserved.

Weeks passed without Myron Selznick ever returning Sammy’s

call. I watched closely for some sign of disappointment in Sammy
but there was none. He went right on crowing around the o ce like
a bantam cock. I began to picture Sammy twenty years from now,
growing bald and mellow, making mild jokes about the
impetuousness of youth. It was a tremendous temptation not to
exult. Well, Sammy, my boy, so you  nally bit o  more than you
could chew?

Soon I was glad for my restraint. Because it was so wrong to

imagine that Sammy could ever stop running this early in the race.

I remember Sammy rushing in, triumphant and jumpy, as if he

had stolen the cheese and avoided the trap. He had.

“Shake hands with God’s Gift to Hollywood,” he said, grabbing

my hand before I had time to stick it in my pocket.

sold that story?”

“Five thousand bucks,” he said.
“Go home and get a good night’s sleep,” I said. “You’ll feel better

in the morning.”

was my  rst story.”

It was screwy, it was Horatio Alger, it was true.
“It’s a disgrace,” I said. “Only  ve thousand. I’d be ashamed to

take it.”

ideas where that one came from.”

“You mean from Julian Blumberg?”
“Aah,” he said, “that schlemiel had nothing on the ball but a

prayer. He’s lucky I bothered with him.”

“Like Miss Goldbaum,” I said quietly.
There. That’s what it needed. All of a sudden I was hating Sammy

Glick. Ah, that felt better. It was satisfying. No more being annoyed
or disturbed or curious or revolted. There isn’t a decent emotion in
the lot. But this felt like it was on the level, good-to-the-last-drop
one-hundred-percent-pure hate.
As if things weren’t bad enough, the next morning right between a
spoonful of soft-boiled egg and a bite of toast I read something in
the  lm section of the morning paper that brought on acute
indigestion. You didn’t have to be an FBI man to detect the subtle
hand of Mr. Glick.

TEN GRAND FOR BOY GENIUS

Sammy Glick, youngest radio columnist and ranking favorite for national
boy-genius honors, has sold his  rst screen story to World-Wide for
$10,000. Titled Girl Steals Boy, story is supposed to go into immediate
production as one of big budget pictures on World-Wide’s program. It is
the  rst of a series World-Wide has contracted for, according to Mr.
Glick. Mr. Glick was undecided whether to accept any Hollywood o ers
or to remain in his position on the Record, he said last night
Collaborating with him was Julian Blumberg.

get mentioned at all. I was very bitter. I didn’t know whether to be
painfully jealous of Sammy Glick or congratulate myself on not
being like him. I’m afraid I did both.

Sammy was in and out of the o ce the next few days, very

important and mysterious, conscientiously neglecting his work.

“You still here?” I said. “I thought you had gone to Hollywood.”
“No,” Sammy said, “you know how it is, once you get newspaper

ink in your veins.”

“Sure,” I said. “In other words you haven’t got a job in Hollywood

yet.”

“No,” Sammy said, “not yet.”
Then one day Sammy didn’t show up at all. Maybe he’s sick, I

thought at  rst, but I quickly discounted this optimism. Guys like
Sammy Glick don’t get sick unless it helps them out of a contract or
lands them an insurance payment. The afternoon passed and still no
Sammy. Maybe he was murdered by Julian Blumberg, I dared to
hope. But I knew better. Julian undoubtedly had talent, but he
didn’t have the nerve to kill time.

While I was wondering, Sammy came in, or rather, he made his

entrance. He wore a new suit. He also wore a new expression. I took
one look and I decided I liked it even less than the old one. He wore
a blue-check tab-shirt and a red carnation in his buttonhole. His
shoes screamed newness. Brown alligator. He caught my look. “Set
me back  fteen bucks,” he said. I took a step back and drank him in.
He took out his cigarette case and o ered me a Parliament. Sammy
Glick, my Sammy Glick, my little copy boy. America, America, I
thought, God shed His grace on thee and crown thy good with …

“Hello, obnoxious,” I said.
“I came in to say good-bye,” Sammy said.
“Good-bye,” I said.
“I’m not kidding,” he said. “I’m o  for Hollywood.”
“I’ll bet you got Irving Thalberg plenty worried,” I said.
“If he’s not he oughta be,” Sammy said. “I’ve got a hunch

Hollywood is my meat.”

struggle along without you another day?”

Wide on the strength of that story.”

Does he go too?”

“No,” Sammy said simply, “World-Wide just wanted me.”
“Well,” I said, “our gain is World-Wide’s loss.”
“No more peanuts for me,” Sammy said. “From now on it’s two

hundred and  fty bucks a week, starting a week from Wednesday.”

Five guys whistled.
There was a short pause, during which time I composed a short

history of Sammy Glick, complete from twelve to two hundred and
 fty a week, analyzing it from the sociological, psychological,
philosophical and zoological points of view. It was America, all the
glory and the opportunity, the push and the speed, the grinding of
gears and the crap. It didn’t take nearly this long to think. It went
zingo, just a look, a blank look.

“See you in the Brown Derby,” Sammy was saying.
Then I got nostalgic, I was always a soft guy, so I said:
“Sure kid, and remember, don’t say ain’t.”
That was too good for Sammy. He didn’t like it. He was going to

be one of those big shots who didn’t like to be reminded. There
seem to be two kinds of self-conscious self-made men, those who
like to dwell on the patriotic details of their ascent from newsboy or
shoe-shiner at two bucks and peanuts a week and those who take
every new level as if it were the only one they ever knew, rushing
ahead so fast they are ashamed, afraid to look back and see where
they’ve come from. One is a bore and the other is a heel. Sammy
may have had other faults, but he had never been a bore.

I watched Sammy walk out of the o ce that day, and then I stood

at the window and watched his new shoes and his new hat cross the
sidewalk and disappear into a taxi, and then I leaned out the
window and watched the taxi go ducking in and out through tra c
like a broken- eld runner.

Like Sammy Glick, I thought, as I watched the cab at the next
crossing jump out ahead of the car that should have had the right of
way. There was a shrieking of brakes, a raw angry voice, and
Sammy’s cab was away, around the corner on two wheels, though I
stayed at the window a long while staring after it.

OceanofPDF.com

For months after that, whenever I thought of the way Sammy Glick
had blown in, over, and through our o ce, I was overcome. I tried
to  atter myself into thinking that mine was a moral disgust, but of
course it was much more than that, or would you call it much less?
Left in the draft of Sammy’s speed I had caught a bad case of
jealousy. From here on I may be accused of having the soul of a
shopgirl, but I might as well admit it: Long before Sammy Glick had
been shot through my life like a bullet I had had Hollywood on my
mind. I had wanted to go for all the usual reasons: I was anxious to
investigate the persistent rumors that the “streets paved with gold”
which the early Spanish explorers had hunted in vain had suddenly
appeared in the vicinity of Hollywood and Vine. I was half
convinced that Southern California was really the modern Garden of
Eden its press agents claimed it to be. And like all the other writers
outside of Hollywood I had seen enough of its product to convince
myself that I could do no worse.

Of course I never mentioned this to anybody and, if it hadn’t been

for the unexpected whim of some Hollywood mogul, I would still be
pounding a typewriter for the Record. I don’t really know how it
happened yet, for the only  ction writing I had managed to do was
a story in the Post last year and another more recently in Cosmo, and
neither of those would have set the world on  re, or Edward J.
O’Brien either, for that matter. I guess one of the Monarch execs
must have just got the idea of rounding up all the drama columnists
in New York and when they pulled in the nets, there I was,
 oundering with the rest.

The day after the news broke that I had “surrendered to

Hollywood” (though it certainly hadn’t been much of a battle), a
girl’s voice came quavering over the telephone to me.

you this way and you probably don’t even remember me …”

“Who is this?” I said.
“Miss Goldbaum. Rosalie Goldbaum. You met me that night with

Sammy Glick?”

her voice. It was a shrill voice, shrill but dead, like a high note on a
cheap piccolo.

again.

hung up.

“Hello?”
“I’m still here,” she said.
“Anything wrong?” I said. “Something the matter?”
“When I read you were going to Hollywood  …” she started.

“When I read that, I wondered …”

She must have been crying.
“I mean I’ve got to see you,” she said.
Oh, Christ, I thought. “Meet me at the Tavern at seven,” I said.
I got there  fteen or twenty minutes late because I stopped to

have a couple of drinks to take the curse o  my rendezvous. She
didn’t even know enough to  nd herself a table and wait for me. She
was just sitting on a bench by the door. I hadn’t realized that  rst
time how scrawny she was. When she took her coat o , her shoulder
blades stuck out. Her eyes were red and soggy. When I took her
hand and said Gladtoseeyou, it was soft and rubbery, like a half-
blown balloon.

Her eyes looked scared and she said too quickly, “Oh, it was

awfully nice of you to come.”

saying anything more. I put my hand lightly at her elbow to guide
her and our eyes searched each other’s for a moment. There was
something too intimate and uncomfortable between us.

“How’ve you been since I saw you last?” I said as we sat down.

“You’re looking swell.”

It was stupid and it sounded  at so I let it go at that. I looked up

at her and waited. It was her move.

to order  rst or plunge right into it.

Glick.”

Queer how she could have been so close to him and yet always

use his full name. As if it already had achieved the rounded
signi cance of an F. Scott Fitzgerald or a Sinclair Lewis. Somehow I
sensed I shouldn’t wisecrack. So I compromised.

“I can,” I said cagily.
“Will you, would you, Mr. Manheim, see him for me?”
“Sure,” I said, “when I run into him, I’ll tell him you said hello.”
That was cruel, for I knew it was more than that. But it was the

quickest way I knew of  nding out.

know …”

“But you must get all that in his letters,” I broke in. “What more

could I do?”

“Find out why he’s stopped writing,” she blurted out. “He used to

write, once in a while, anyway, when he  rst went out. But not any
more. He just won’t answer any more. Not even a postcard in
months and months.”

She dried her leaking nose with her napkin.
“I know it’s tough on you, Rosalie,” I said, “but maybe it isn’t as

bad as you think. It’s never a cinch to get set in a new spot. Why,
he’s probably up to his ears …”

Can you imagine, me defending the slob? But I never was much of

an actor and it didn’t sound convincing.

was all arranged. He promised to send for me the second week he
was out there. I was so sure I even quit my job. I got rid of
everything I couldn’t take along. I was all set. He told me not to
worry, he’d send for me in a couple of weeks more. Until  nally, he
just stopped writing.”

“Oh,” I said, losing my appetite.

have the train fare. He was going to send me his second week’s
salary.”

getting all excited again just remembering what he had told her.

“So now I don’t know what to do,” she said.
“Skunk,” I said.
“Oh, you’ve got to tell him I don’t understand,” she said, hurrying

to keep ahead of her tears. “Ask him why, please ask him why.”

She was crying. The waiter was standing over us impatiently. It

was embarrassing. “Want yours with onions?” I asked.

don’t know why she had to wear mascara. Maybe it made her feel
better able to face things but she didn’t have a face for mascara, and
when it started to run she had the forlorn look of a doll with the
paint streaking o  in the rain.

telling me you were his closest friend.”

I almost choked on a mouthful of steak. My God, that was

probably true!

conscience for being considered a friend of a jerk like Sammy Glick.
She sneaked it into her purse as quickly as possible, as if her hand
was trying to put something over on the rest of her.

I  nd another job,” she said.

“Forget it,” I said, “you can pay me back next time you see me.”

We shook hands and she held mine a moment as if dreading to
break away even from the slim protection I represented, pressing my
hand hard to keep from crying again. I looked after her as she
turned down toward Broadway and the crowd swallowed her up. I
couldn’t help wondering what New York would do to her now that
Sammy Glick had used her and thrown her away.

All the way out on the train my mind still felt damp with Miss
Goldbaum’s tears. So as soon as I got set in Hollywood, or as set as a
bewildered stranger ever gets in this town, I gave Sammy a buzz. He
talked so loud I had to hold the receiver at arm’s length. It was like
a loudspeaker.

Lost Angels.”

that time had not mellowed Mr. Glick.

“I was having a drink with your producer the other night,” he

said. “He was boasting about getting you for a hundred and  fty a
week. Why the hell didn’t you let me know you were coming? I
could have  xed it for you.”

on a hundred and  fty dollars a week.

“Jesus, Al,” he laughed, “you know about as much about

Hollywood …”

“As Rosalie Goldbaum,” I said.
That would have stopped the average heel, but not a man who

had a genius for it like Sammy.

“Listen, Al,” he said, “I haven’t got time to talk about that now.

Why don’t you run over here tomorrow around lunchtime?”

I said I would and he gave me that glad-hand business. “Okay,

Alsie-palsie. Glad you’re gonna be with us, keed.”

the studio that had employed me, trying to  nd out why. Then I
hurried over for my audience with Little Caesar. I told myself at the
time that I was only eager to see justice done by Miss Goldbaum,
but there was a lot of curiosity mixed up in it too. Morbid curiosity.
Like wanting to pull a bandage o  to see an infection you know has
spread.

There was his SAMMY GLICK in gold metal lettering, screwed onto the

door of his o ce with a certain permanence. Inside, I found that I
had only gained admission to his secretary, who was occupying an
o ce that seemed somewhat larger than our city room. I told her I

was an old friend of Sammy’s, which is what you would call a white
lie, and she told me that Mr. Glick would be tied up in a story
conference for the next half hour.

An hour and twenty minutes later Mr. Glick made his appearance.

The  rst thing I noticed was that he wasn’t wearing a tie. Instead he
wore a big yellow scarf with horses racing around the edges, and a
big yellow handkerchief to match, which dangled rakishly over the
pocket of a sports coat you could have played checkers on. He
reeked of toilet water. He was certainly a long way from the thin,
pale, eager little kid who used to say, “Thank you, Mr. Manheim.”
At least super cially. He had one of those California tans. He had
 lled out a little, but he still looked fast on his feet.

We sat down in his o ce. On his walls were a couple of

autographed pictures of stars, and several of him, one playing
tennis, and another playing genius on the set with the director and
principals. He swung his feet up on his desk and I noticed his
earners-hair socks and tricky shoes, leather strips woven like a
Mexican basket, with a space left for the toes to stick out.

“These are swell shoes for working,” he said. “Lucky Hamilton,

the director of my  rst picture, brought them back for me from
Mexico City. The Greasers call them huaraches. I’m a sucker for
shoes.”

I never could get excited about clothes, so there didn’t seem to be

much to say. But you never have to worry about conversation with
Sammy Glick around.

“Well, how’s the chain gang back in the o ce?” he said. “Still

working so hard they haven’t got time to starve to death?”

“They all wanted to be remembered, Sammy,” I said.
As if I actually believed that Sammy would ever remember

anybody who couldn’t do him some good.

“Great old gang,” he said meaninglessly, and then, more himself:

“But once you get the Indian sign on these producers out here the
dough comes rolling in so fast you can use it for wall paper.”

“Miss Goldbaum wants to be remembered too,” I said.
Sammy stopped running for a moment. He looked at me, and I

knew he was wondering how much I knew.

grabbing a little lunchee  rst? Where do you want to go, the Derby,
the Vendome, or Al Levy’s? Those are the only restaurants in
Hollywood.”

He picked the Vendome because that’s where everybody was

going then.

he could a ord a car that big as soon as this.

“I couldn’t,” he explained. “I grabbed it up from a ham actor who

bought it on the strength of a contract he was going to get. As soon
as I heard that fell through, I beat it over to see him and showed
him how it was cheaper for him to let me take the payments o  his
hands than for him just to give the car back to the dealers again. It’s
only gone sixteen hundred miles. Just saved me the trouble of
breaking it in.”

on speaking terms with everybody, the parking attendant, the
hatcheck girl who could have been a stand-in for Jean Harlow, the
headwaiter who led us to a table from which he  ourishingly
removed that restaurant symbol of rank, the RESERVED sign.

The moment Sammy sat down he started looking around to see

who was there. He waved to a bald, bulky middle-aged man across
the way with a high-blood-pressure complexion.

“Didn’t expect to see you up this early, Harry,” Sammy yelled

across.

“I still don’t know whether I’m up or not,” the man laughed back.
“That’s Harold Godfrey Wilson,” Sammy said proudly. “He’s one

of the top screen writers in the business. Twenty- ve hundred a
week. He threw a terri c party last night. Everybody had to come as
their pet aversion.”

“I could just have sent you.”
Sammy reminded me of one of those willing club  ghters who

laugh when they get hit. “Same old Al,” he grinned, “still trying to
get a rise out of me.”

much the same, in chic dark dresses, fantastic hats, silver foxes and
lots of jewels. Sammy leaped to his feet like a Boy Scout at the
sound of the Star-Spangled Banner.

exchanging a few pleasantries. “The  rst thing I did when I got to
town was call her up and give her an item for her column. That’s a
good habit to get into because every couple of times you can slip
her a story about yourself too. That’s one of the main tricks in this
town, to keep them reading about you.”

Goldbaum, but I  nally managed to work her back into the
conversation again, while Sammy was drinking his co ee with B &
B.

“Well, how is she, Al?” he asked.
“Swell,” I said, “just swell. High and dry.”
“I couldn’t help it,” he said. “I’m sorry, Al. I swear to God.”
He was still a kid in many ways. He sounded actually frightened.

And the sad part of it was he was really telling the truth when he
said he couldn’t help it.

“The trouble with me is that I was too softhearted with Rosalie,”

Sammy said. “I never told her I was going to bring her out here. She
just took it for granted and I didn’t want to hurt her.”

“That’s your weakness all right,” I said. “You’re just killing her

with kindness.”

“What could I do with Rosalie out here?” he said. “Rosalie’s one

of those nice Jewish girls whose main idea in life is to stay home all
the time and start having kids right away. And this is a town where
you’ve got to keep circulating. She’d go nuts inside a month.”

able to love you in the  rst place. But since she doesn’t seem to take
the same view of it I do, the least you could do is let her down easy
with a nice letter and enough money to tide her over till she’s on
her feet again. Give the poor kid a break.”

And then, for no reason at all, I added, “Give everybody a break.”

For, as I said, he was still a kid then. The crust hadn’t completely
hardened.

“How much would you send,” he asked, “if you were me?”
“I shudder at the thought,” I said, “but I’d give her every cent I

could spare. After all, she quit her job to come out here.”

“How would  fteen hundred do?” he asked.
I had the feeling that this was more a grandstand play for me than

kindness toward Miss Goldbaum. I didn’t see how he had that much
money put away on his present salary and told him so.

said. “The drunker he gets the bigger he bets. He’s a cinch for a
couple of hundred every time we play.”

life with Sammy Glick was my idea of a bargain.

way, just in case it slips your mind.”

“I sprinkle rosin on my mind every morning,” Sammy said.

“Nothing ever slips up there.”

The check arrived. I reached in my pocket to pay it, but the

waiter had already handed Sammy a pencil and he signed it.

Then Sammy made one of those bumblebee exits, buzzing from

table to table on his way out.

he had disposed of the Goldbaum question.

“Got anything to work on yet?” Sammy asked.
“At the moment I’m very busy working on the producer’s

secretary,” I said, “trying to convince her that it’s his duty to call me
in and let me know what I’m being paid for.”

can a ord to warm your ass for a while. You don’t have to start
impressing them till around the  fth month.”

“But I didn’t come out here to sit on the bench all season,” I said.

“I want to learn everything I can about screen technique.”

“Screen technique is a pushover,” Sammy said. “All you’ve got to

can compare it with the  nished product. It’s being cut and scored
now. They’ll be previewing in two or three weeks.”

“You mean Girl Steals Boy?” I said. “All  nished already?”
“Already?” Sammy said. “They’ll be shooting my next one in a

couple of weeks. When they really make you start writing out here
they don’t fool. I had to do my last one in three and a half weeks.
One day I even dictated twenty-seven pages of screenplay. What I
always say is, writing either comes easy to you or it doesn’t.”

“That reminds me,” I said, “what ever became of Julian

Blumberg?”

heap four or  ve months ago. I’ve been trying to get him a job. But
it’s pretty tough because the studios aren’t hiring junior writers in
mass lots the way they did a year ago.”

“What are junior writers?” I wanted to know.
“Well,” Sammy said, “nobody’s exactly sure, but I’d say they’re

writers who aren’t given anything to write, and if they do write
something of their own they can’t  nd anybody to read it.”

By this time we had reached his studio. “I would drive you back

to Monarch,” he said, “but I’m working on a football story and I’m
running a couple of college pictures in the projection room this
afternoon. Just to make sure it isn’t too similar.”

“Which I suppose is a polite way of saying you’re looking for

something you can lift,” I said.

He seemed actually pleased that I saw through his feeble

euphemism. He grinned. “You’ll be all right out here,” he said. “You
learn fast.”

That was one thing you had to give Sammy. He made no bones

about it. At least with me. He was glorifying the American rat.

car. “Here’s a hot one Lombard told me,” he said, and he giggled it
into my ear.

“I heard that three weeks ago at Bleeck’s,” I told him.
But he was impregnable. He took it with his own peculiar brand

of joie de vivre. I found myself realizing that he had cut a lot of warts
o  his personality since I had seen him last. He was in the  rst

grade of the charm school. I wouldn’t be surprised if there were a
great many people out here who actually thought he had it already.
People who didn’t know him very well. That is, people he hadn’t got
around to using yet.

make a night of it sometime.”

of the time with Sammy, I didn’t bother to point out that it might be
his place to call me. I just said, “Thanks for the lunch, Sammy,” or
something equally useless and then I watched him hurry across the
street and up the studio steps. His form was smoother and his stride
wasn’t as jerky as it was in the old days on the Record, but he was
still running all right. And from the way he was hugging the rail it
looked as if Hollywood was the perfect track for him. I was always a
man of simple ambitions, but one of them was to be around when
Sammy crossed the  nish line, wherever that would be.

When I got back to my cubbyhole of an o ce, I shoved down the

window to keep out the sound of the machine shop across the way,
plunked my feet on the desk and pondered what kind of a world it
was which could give Sammy a reputation on the basis of one story
he hadn’t written, while its real author couldn’t even get himself
hired as a junior writer.

producer I was still trying to see called to say that I might as well
not wait any longer this afternoon as he was tied up in a story
conference. Out of sheer desperation I asked her if there wasn’t
anything else a person could be in a story conference besides tied
up, but she didn’t even chuckle. So then I sat down and wrote a very
businesslike letter to Miss Rosalie Goldbaum advising her to forget
Sammy Glick but not to forget to write me whether she got that
 fteen hundred or not. I told her to  nd herself a good clean
hardworking boy and not to pine for Sammy, for he was one of
those geniuses who could only be married to his work. I just marked
that down under the heading of kindness, then. That was because I
didn’t know as much about Sammy Glick then as I do now, or about

the world either. It was funny as time went on how the more I
learned about one the more I understood about the other.

known. You’d think a writer on contract to one of the biggest
studios in Hollywood would be thrown into that merry-go-round of
social life the fan magazines and the columns like to tell you about.
Unless you have an unusual talent for knowing everybody, it isn’t
so. It seemed as if the few friends I knew in Hollywood from the
theater crowd had all gone back to the land, to Bucks County or
Cape Cod or one of those places. After a couple of weeks I moved
out of the Hollywood Plaza into a big, pink, reasonably priced
apartment house called the Villa Espana. I spent desperate and
lonely hours in my o ce at the studio mulling over the story they
had  nally given me to read, an action melodrama about smugglers,
come-on girls and the coast of Florida. I knew that Sammy Glick
would have thrown it back in their faces and demanded something
more in keeping with his artistic temperament, but I supposed the
producers knew their business and, as it turned out, this story did
have the makings of a fair C picture. But it was dismal, ditch-
digging work, and I felt more alone than ever because the producer
didn’t even seem to care how I was doing. The only word I had for
weeks and weeks was the producer’s request, via intero ce
communication, to keep turning in pages.

hoping to run into someone I knew, and then I’d stroll down
Hollywood Boulevard, stopping in at one of the joints for a drink, or
browsing around in Stanley Rose’s bookstore listening to the
conversation, or maybe dropping in at a movie. After a while I felt
as if I were wandering around a small town, because there never
seemed to be anything to do and I began to notice the same faces
drifting by night after night.

The only friend I made in those early days was an unknown

playwright who had the o ce two doors down from mine. He told
me he had come out to Hollywood about a year ago because the
doctor had told him his four-year-old daughter’s sinus trouble was
going to get serious if he didn’t get her out to a warm, dry climate.

When I met him he was just beginning to get jittery because his
option was coming up in a couple of weeks and he didn’t seem to
think he could get a job anywhere else if they let him out. He said
the reason he was scared was because he hadn’t any credits.
Anybody who goes a year in Hollywood without getting a single
screen credit, he said, might just as well shop around for another
profession.

I asked him how it happened that none of his pictures had

reached the screen, and he explained that the  rst script he wrote
had been shelved because at the last minute they couldn’t get the
actor it had been written for, and the second one never reached  rst
base because it was a topical subject and one of the other studios
beat them to it, and the third one was stymied because it couldn’t
get by the Hays O ce. I didn’t see why that should hurt him if the
producers had liked his scripts, but he took a more pessimistic view
of it. He said by the time a year had gone by, all they would
probably remember is that he had worked twelve months without
getting anything on the screen and that would be the pay-o .

dinner one night, but when I came to my o ce the following
Monday morning he was gone. He left a note for me saying the
worst had happened, and that I had taken some of the curse o 
those last few weeks and that he was driving back to New York to
see if he couldn’t get an advance on a new play he had started. A
couple of years later I saw one of his plays that the Federal Theater
was doing in Los Angeles, but I’ve never seen him again. It’s queer
to think how many little guys there are like that, with more ability
than push, sucked in by one wave and hurled out by the next, for
every Sammy Glick who slips through and over the waves like a
porpoise.

After he left, I tried to think if there was anyone else in town I

knew, and I suddenly remembered Henry Powell Turner, the poet,
who had been a senior when I was a freshman at Wesleyan. I
remembered how excited we all were at school when we heard that
the book-length poem on the history of New England which he had
read to the Literary Society while he was still in college had been

awarded the Pulitzer Prize. I had met Henry again on his way out to
Hollywood several years ago and he had told me, by way of making
conversation, to be sure and look him up if I was ever out that way.

so I  nally wired him at his studio and asked him to call me. I didn’t
hear from him until several weeks later when I picked up the phone
to hear a cultured woman’s voice say, “This is Mr. Henry Powell
Turner’s secretary. Mr. and Mrs. Turner would like to have the
pleasure of your company at dinner at seven-thirty this Wednesday
evening.”

 ve-dollar taxi ride from the Villa Espana, that you could see the
Paci c Ocean from its front lawn, and that it was the largest
example of the worst kind of architecture I have ever seen.
Hollywood Moorish.

a great poet should look like. I could remember him as a student,
built along heroic proportions, six feet three and over two hundred
pounds, with blond curly hair and the kind of chiseled, classical
good looks that always remind me of the way epic Greek poets
looked—or ought to have looked. And even when I had seen Turner
last, four or  ve years ago, he was still a romantic  gure to me,
erect and hearty as ever, with his wild yellow hair turning a more
digni ed gray at the temples.

with the expensive furniture and the high ceiling, there were only a
few strands left of the old youthful yellow among the thinning,
straightening gray, but he was hardly more digni ed because he was
already well on his way toward the state of drooling intoxication
which I later discovered he managed to achieve with monotonous
regularity each evening.

with a boyish  gure in low-cut red velvet. They asked me the usual
polite questions during cocktails, and conversation died once or
twice at dinner, though Turner and I did our best to squeeze the
most out of our common interest in Wesleyan. That’s about all I

remember about that dinner, except that it was served with an
irritating pomp, and that Turner shattered whatever illusions I had
left about him by telling one of those long dirty stories for which the
only justi cation would be the tag line at the climax, which they
never seem to reach. At the  nish he laughed so loud that he  nally
broke into a coughing  t which he managed to soothe with loud
gulps of sparkling burgundy.

dinner,  nally disappeared, and I found myself cooped up with him
and several bottles of Bellows Scotch in his imposing study. I spent
the next three or four uncomfortable hours in trying to follow him
through his various stages of drunkenness. In the  rst, he recited
some of his lyrical poetry. In the second, he mocked his own poems
with dirty limericks composed extemporaneously, “which,” he
laughingly informed me three or four times, “I have seen  t to
create in line of my duties as Hollywood’s Poet Laureate.” In the
next he reviewed his chief conquests of the current season with a
glint that brought me back to the lurid tales we used to swap in our
adolescence. And of course he reached the  nal stage full of teary
nostalgia for the glories of his youth and eloquent resolutions to
return to New England and his Muse, “as soon as I  nish the
MacDonald-Eddy script I have to do when I get back from my
vacation.”

had topped o  the evening by killing the second bottle of Scotch
and singing a Wesleyan song. I must have been more upset than I
realized when I left there, because by the time I reached my room
and started to undress, the vision of Henry Powell Turner before and
after was still with me. Only now what I had taken merely for
boredom or disgust came into sharper focus as I began to be stunned
by the horror and sense of mental nausea most of us feel when we’re
forced into ringside seats for great personal tragedies.

So I buttoned my shirt again, put my tie back on and called a cab.

For I had decided that the only way to forget the wreck of my epic
poet was to make an evening of it. I asked the cab driver where a

man could get a drink and a couple of laughs at an hour like this
and he drove me to the Back Lot Club.

Hollywood is. It goes to sleep at twelve o’clock like any decent
Middle Western village. The gay nightlife you dream about there is
con ned to private houses and the handful of hotspots which enjoy
special privileges for which they are taxed in a very special way. At
least that’s the way it was when I  rst went out there before Judge
Bowron and his reformers had won the Battle of Los Angeles and
began to fumigate the City Hall.

The Back Lot was a noisy, gaudy example of what most people

seem to imagine all Hollywood is after dark. But except for an
occasional celebrated face, it might have been any night spot in any
American city. It was a montage of hot music, drunken laughter,
loud wisecracks and hostesses like lollypops in red, green and
yellow wrappers. The music took the old sweet melodies and
twisted them like hairpins. It was a symphony strictly from hunger,
to which everybody beat their feet in a frenzy of despair, trying to
forget luck that was either too good or too bad, festered ambitions
or hollow success. It made me realize again how true jazz music
was, how it echoed everything that was churning inside us, all the
crazy longings raw and writhing.

more while my angle narrowed from a full shot of the crowd, to a
group shot of the ladies who  oated through the semidarkness on
the loose, to a close-up of one particular hostess, large, but well-
proportioned inside her tight satin evening gown, with a reddish
glint to her hair combed strikingly back from her face and falling
gracefully to her bare shoulders, where it emphasized the creamy
whiteness of her skin. I watched her hips slip up and down as she
moved among the tables and it wasn’t until she lingered at one of
them to chat with a little blonde co-worker that I realized who the
little blonde’s escort was. Sammy Glick.

as a long-lost brother if he had only been willing to sit down and
have a drink with me. And, in the mood I was in, the redhead was

something of an attraction too. It didn’t make sense, but my friends
have always considered me a disgustingly normal person, and it was
normal if unprincipled to get the idea that Sammy might be able to
supply the kind of good time I was looking for.

That didn’t surprise me, for it was hard to imagine him ever letting
his defenses down long enough really to lose control. As soon as he
spotted me he leaped up, yelling, “Well, if it isn’t little Alsie-palsie,”
and threw his arms around me. It was strange to think that Sammy
probably liked me as much as he could like anybody in the world. I
think that was because anybody who took life the way Sammy did,
gangster, dictator or screenwriter, was doomed to be lonely, and
even though Sammy knew I could read him like the top line of an
optometrist’s chart, he also knew that he could relax with me
because I wasn’t willing or didn’t know how to use him for a ladder
the way he used me. And at moments like these when he slowed
down to a trot I sensed a  ash, just the tiniest sparkle of
appreciation for the way he had climbed on my shoulders to leap
over the wall, and a hint or two of the old respect that he felt in
those early days on the Record when I was still trying to teach him
not to say ain’t.

about, Sally Ann Joyce.”

He put his arm possessively around the little blonde and grinned

at her. She took this as her cue to laugh. She seemed too young to
look so tired around the eyes.

“Honey,” he said,” I want you to meet one of the sweetest guys in

the world. Al Manheim.

“And last but never least, you can see for yourself,” Sammy said,

indicating the redhead, “is Billie. I don’t think I know your last
name, honey.”

pleased about the whole thing, “Billie Rand.”

place the body. But I bet you can guess where I’d like to place it.”

pushed Billie’s chair in for her and as she looked up over her
shoulder to smile into my face she didn’t seem to mind my staring
down her dress.

“What are you trying to do, Al,” Sammy said, “give us an

imitation of a tourist at the edge of Grand Canyon?”

Sally Ann and Billie giggled dutifully again, though I wasn’t sure

whether they thought it was that funny or not. We drank a couple
more rounds, while Sammy told the girls what pals we had been in
New York, and it was funny to see how he could carry himself away
with his own salesmanship. By the time he was through he made it
sound as if the only reason I had come to Hollywood was to be near
him.

“Maybe you boys want to be alone,” Billie said, knowing that was

always good for a laugh.

It was, but of course Sammy managed to top it.
“Don’t give up, girls,” he said. “Haven’t you heard we’re

ambisextrous?”

The last time the waiter set our drinks up again he told us the bar

was closing in ten minutes.

Sammy pushed the table away rudely. “Let’s get out of this

hellhole,” he said. “You’re all coming up to my apartment.” He took
one girl under each arm, calling to the boss on the way out: “Don’t
worry about your girls, Pop—I’ll see that they get to bed early.”

friendly as possible, “Glad you came in, Mr. Glick. Come back
again.”

I was feeling pretty woozy from all that liquor and the smoke, but

I remember wondering as I hit the open air how many people in this
world would tell Sammy they were glad he had come—in that same
tone of voice.

Sammy’s apartment was in the fashionable Colonial House just o 

the Sunset Strip. The names of the tenants underneath the mail
boxes at the entrance read like a list of Hollywood’s most eligible
bachelors.

that must have been way beyond his means for those early days, but
he wrote o  only part of the expense to shelter, the rest to prestige.

 t Sammy, at least not yet, with a bedroom that opened o  a long
living room with a  replace at one end. Sammy brought out
Courvoisier. I wondered where he picked up all those little tricks,
and then Billie and I started playing records and doing a little slow
dancing, while Sammy and Sally Ann took over the big couch.

As we danced, hardly moving together, I heard the sound and

silence of held kisses, several shrill, half-giggled Sammy, don’ts! and
then Sammy started giving her the business about putting her in the
movies. It was hardly more than kidding, and Sally Ann knew it, but
you could tell from the way she kidded back how much that meant
to her. It was all so naked that I wished I were drunker or not there.
It was no secret to anybody that she was working out on him and he
was working out on her, each one wanting something and not quite
admitting it. Some people call that the Hollywood tug of war,
though that concept is a little narrow. Hollywood may be one of its
most blatant battlegrounds, but it is really a world war, undeclared.

then Sammy and Sally Ann started for the bedroom with their arms
around each other. They could have slipped out with us only half-
noticing them, but Sammy could no more do things by halves than
J. P. Morgan could run for president on the Communist ticket.

“If anybody asks for me,” he cracked at the door, “tell them I’m

tied up in a conference.”

Billie started to laugh, but it was just force of habit, and I didn’t

crack a smile, so he must have thought he wasn’t being funny
enough and tried again.

“Well, be good, Al,” he said, “and if you can’t be good, be careful,

and if you can’t be careful, see that it gets a good agent.”

a Puritan, but there has to be somewhere you draw the line and this
was always it for me. I have always been one of those who held that
whatever sex may have been to our primitive ancestors, it has

become an experience for us that at least deserves the same privacy
we give to taking a bath. Sinking to the couch with Billie, I
remembered a similar revulsion years ago when I walked into a
college fraternity the morning after an all-night house party and
found half a dozen drunken cards cheering and egging on a
preoccupied couple on the living-room sofa.

“What are you thinking about, honey?” Billie stage-whispered,

though she could never be the quiet, seductive type. She and this
whole set-up were about as subtle as Wallace Beery’s acting.

I wasn’t exactly surprised to  nd that Sammy approached the

most elemental emotion in life with all the sensitivity of a
slaughterhouse worker slitting a steer’s throat, but somehow that
last crack at the bedroom door had sliced too close to the bone, and
it wasn’t very pretty. With one razor-edge phrase he had cut me
down to his level, and it was going to take me some time to rise
again.
But one thing you had to say for Billie, she was very kind in her way
and always patient.

I felt as if I had just closed my eyes when a sense of motion in the
room opened them again. Through sticky eyes with the eyeballs
burning holes in the lids, my host slowly came into focus, dressed
for the day and apparently on his way out. As I sat up and started to
rub some of the sleep out of my eyes, I could see that Sammy was
all washed and shaved and looking irritatingly fresh. My face felt
like an old shoe that had been left out all night in the rain, shrunk
and sti  in some parts, swollen and mushy in others. But Sammy’s
face looked fresh from the laundry.

I looked around at the half-empty glasses, the cigarette butts and

the other desolate remains, and asked, yawning, “What time is it?”

“Eight-thirty,” Sammy said.
“Eight-thirty?” My stomach went roller-coasting down. “What the

hell you doing up at eight-thirty?”

“I have a date for breakfast,” Sammy said.

“Not …” I began.
“No,” Sammy said. “That was last night. This is business.”
Then I realized only Sammy and I were left.
“Where are the girls?” I said. “In the other …?”
“I got them out of here around  ve,” Sammy said. “While you

were passed out. I don’t like to see them when I get up. They get in
my hair.”

eight-thirty?”

“I’m picking up a friend for breakfast before I check in,” Sammy

said. “As a matter of fact you know him. Julie Blumberg.”

“Blumberg,” I muttered. “Oh—Julian …?”
“He’s been trying to write some originals,” Sammy said, “so I

thought I ought to help the poor kid out and take a look at them.”

I was too groggy to see anything wrong with that picture so I just

let it pass. Sammy advised me to call the studio and say I was sick
and then climb into his bed for the rest of the day. He was being
kind, but even in my condition I could sense the way he was
gloating over his superior powers of recuperation. He made me
think of some horrible grinning robot.

“You did all right for yourself,” he said. “I’ll buzz you next week

and we’ll do a repeat.”

Then he looked at his watch, saw he was late, cursed his dawdling

and was o  on a run.

bed. When I woke again around four I had a bad taste in my mouth
and a worse one in my mind and all I thought about was getting out
of there as quickly as possible.

I went straight from Sammy’s to a Turkish bath, where I

abandoned myself to steam and sweat and where I had nothing to
do for hours but stare at the ceiling and dwell upon the discovery
that Sammy Glick at work was hardly more terrifying than Sammy
Glick at play.

OceanofPDF.com

I suppose it’s too bad that people can’t be a little more consistent.
But if they were, maybe they would stop being people. They might
become characters in epic tragedies or Hollywood movies. Most of
our characters on the screen are sandwich men for di erent moral
attitudes. We will have the young man who stands for Honest
Government and Public Service while his brother is a low-down
Wallower in Wine, Women and Corruption. In the last reel the good
brother has to be killed o  so the bad brother can be regenerated.
Regenerated. That is one of Hollywood’s favorite words. This may
be heresy, but I have yet to meet anybody who ever got himself
Regenerated. I don’t see any one-hundred-percent-pure heroes
running around loose either. All people seem to do is the best they
can to get along and have a good time; and if that means keeping
what they’ve got, they’re liable to become fascists; and if it means
trying to get what they need and don’t have, there’s a good chance
of their learning the Internationale.

If I were trying to tell this as a picture story instead of just putting

it down the way it happened, my hate for Sammy Glick would have
to be exalted into something noble and conclusive. I mean if he
passed me on the street I would have to cross over to the other side
and sooner or later we would come to grips, probably on the edge of
a cli . But that doesn’t seem to be the way we’re made. Most of us
are ready to greet our worst enemies like long-lost brothers if we
think they can show us a good time, if we think they can do us any
good or if we even reach the conclusion that being polite will get us
just as far and help us live longer.

I’m afraid all this is just an apology for admitting that the next

time Sammy called me, a couple of weeks after that  rst soirée, I
didn’t hang up on him. In fact, I didn’t even refuse his invitation.

And without that slackening of moral  ber I would never have had
an excuse for knowing him better. For there was no use kidding
myself any longer. I wanted to know him. Not that I ever expected
to solve the mystery of What Makes Sammy Run. But I had been
much too involved with Sammy already ever to be able to forget
him. Or even want to. He rankled. He was like a splinter festering
under my skin. If I broke o  now, I had the feeling his memory
would go on torturing me. I had the crazy feeling that only by
drilling into him, deeper and deeper, could I  nally pass through
him and beyond him and free my mind of him at last.

nuts.

“Hiya, sweetheart,” he said, “don’t you love me any more?”
“As much as ever,” I said.
“How’s tricks over at that sausage factory of yours?”
He always made you feel that any confession of failure was on a

level with admitting that you had a yen for nothing but female dogs
and ten-year-old corpses. So all I gave him was a cagey “Okay, I
guess.”

“You guess! Don’t talk like a schlemiel, you schlemiel. Sounds like

you’re letting them push you around.”

“Being pushed around can be quite a luxury,” I said. “At Atlantic

City you have to pay for it.”

“Don’t worry,” he said, “you’ll pay for it here too. Remind me to

give you a couple of pointers on How to Win Friends and In uence
Producers when I see you tonight.”

“Tonight I am going to get into bed and read,” I said.
“Listen, dope, there’s only two things bed is good for. And one of

them isn’t reading.”

I told him to try me some other time as I was already half

undressed. As a matter of fact I did have my tie and shoes o .

right?” he said. “So get those gunboats out of dry dock and get the
hell over here. We’re unpacking and de owering a new crate of
virgins that just came in. I told Billie we might look in on her later
too.”

had come to admire Billie considerably.

“Not tonight, Sammy,” I said. “I’m right in the middle of a book.”
He had to know what book and I told him. “Fontamara. By Ignazio

Silone.”

“Who the hell is Ignats Silone?” he said.
“For my dough one of the greatest writers in the world,” I said.
“No kidding!” He was interested. “Has he got a good story?”
“One of the greatest stories I ever read,” I said. “All about how a

ragged little group of peasants rise against Mussolini.”

about a lot of starving wops? In the  rst place, you’d lose your
whole foreign market and …”

chance for pictures.

like you,” he said. “You’re shell-shocked, you don’t add up. What
good do you think it’s gonna do you to crap around with stu  like
that?”

Very much on the defensive, I admitted that I liked to read.
“Sure,” Sammy said, “I never said I had anything against reading

books …”

but Sammy was too quick for me and was already rounding the
bend of his next sentence.

“But as long as you’re going in for it there’s plenty of good, dead

authors that’ll hand you terri c picture plots on a silver platter.
Why, I knew a guy who made a nice little pile out of one of De
Maupassant’s stories just the other day. And all he had to do was
switch the hooker from a French carriage to a Western stagecoach.
If you were smart you’d try to hit on something like that and write
yourself an original.”

I found myself thinking that wherever De Maupassant was I hoped

he was unaware of what was going on. He had too little faith in
mankind as it was.

hung up?”

“No,” I said, “but only because I have no conscience.”
“That’s what you get for being a rabbi’s son,” he said, “a

conscience. Going through life with a conscience is like driving your
car with the brakes on.”

the lousy day I had had at the studio. My producer had thrown out
my  rst script and put another writer on with me. His name was
George Pancake. I hate to sound obvious, but Pancake couldn’t have
been over  ve foot  ve and looked as if he shaded two hundred
pounds. He had the body of a wrestler and the face of a fag. The
boys in the o ce across the hall told me Pancake was a credit
hound, one of those writers who practically have convulsions over
sole screen credits, so I knew I was in for trouble. The  rst thing
Pancake said when we started talking it over was that he thought it
would go faster if he did all the writing, as I obviously hadn’t caught
on to what producers want. Then he started dictating a new line as
fast as he could talk and it suddenly hit me that he wasn’t just
coming on the story at all. He must have been working on it for
weeks without my knowing it. When that dawned I felt so low I
knocked o  early, went home and called a masseur. There is
something about a massage that makes it a better gloom-chaser for
me than getting plastered. But it didn’t quite sweat the mood out of
me and just as I was about to climb into bed with my rebellious
peasants and my blues I had a notion that a little of Billie and
Sammy Glick might not be such a bad idea, if only to get my mind
o  my own tsurus.

I sat at Sammy’s little bar a few minutes, while he stood behind it

making drinks and telling me what a riot his next picture was
turning out to be. When the doorbell rang I started to answer it, but
Sammy told me to sit still and let his Jap get it.

he explained. “I think he’s a fugitive from the WPA Artists’ Project.”

We heard the door open and a woman’s voice say, “Hello, Naga.”

terri c thing I ever met.”

with a mannish, swinging stride, like a good woman golfer
following her ball, hatless, coatless, not even carrying a bag, with
both hands thrust deep into the pockets of a smartly tailored suit.

hugged her, half kidding, half on the level. I stood on the sidelines,
conscious that I was seeing a new kinetic element in the life of
Sammy Glick. This was no faithful poodle like Rosalie Goldbaum or
a cute little doll like Sally Ann Joyce. She was arresting, but no
beauty, at least not stamped from the Hollywood mold. She looked
the type that always gets picked to play the leading man in girls’
school productions. She was in her middle twenties, tall, maybe
 ve-eight, and neatly put together though there was something
about the masculinity of her carriage and gestures that scared you
o . Her skin was tanned and seemed to have been pulled too tight
across her face, revealing the bone structure. Her lips seemed even
fuller than they were in her lean face. She left her eyebrows pretty
much alone and I noticed that her nails were cut short and
unpainted. She might have done things with her hair, which was
walnut brown, but she just combed it back into a thick coil.

day trying to duck my producer and then I have to meet him in the
hall on my way out. Ever try putting over a story you know is
falling apart as you go along? Great way to lose weight.”

Her voice was low-keyed but not husky, and her words raced

ahead of each other as if hurrying to keep up with a mind that was
always crowding them.

She maneuvered neatly out of Sammy’s embrace and turned to

me. “My name’s Sargent.”

me nervous. She extended her hand, and when I took it I wasn’t
surprised to  nd her grip intimidating.

writer.”

He put his arm around her shoulder. It wasn’t quite long enough

to make the gesture look graceful.

“Kit is doing the next Gable-Loy.”
There was almost as much pride in his voice as if he had the

assignment himself.

“Oh, you’re Catherine Sargent!”
I felt like Merton-of-the-Movies blurting it out that way, but I

suddenly realized this was the gal all the critics were nominating a
couple of years back to write the great American novel. I could still
remember that  rst book of hers, The Sex Express, which penetrates
the mind of a  apper after her day is done and the depression has
set in, when she’s  oundering in a backwash of neuroticism and
mental disease. I also remembered the author’s photo on the jacket,
a picture that made her look a little more elegant than she looked
now but which caught nicely her cool smile. Under it was a blurb by
Dorothy Parker which ran something like: “Miss Sargent, fresh from
Vassar, takes us on a fascinating and frightening journey …”

I told her how her book had hit me.
“I’m glad you thought so,” she said.
I suppose that was modesty, but it made me feel like a dope. All

she had to do to make me feel that way was just stand there and
smile through me. Because we really haven’t learned to take female
superiority in stride, I resented it.

thousand copies and got her a sweet  ve-year ticket.”

“How did you like it, Sammy?” I asked.
“What I read of it was terri c,” he said, “but I couldn’t get

through the  rst chapter. Let’s get out of here. Let’s go over to the
Back Lot and make like crazy.”

His humor hadn’t improved but he was beginning to develop a

sure re delivery, with some of the knack of the fast-talking comics. I
laughed and he was encouraged.

he pronounced it, it rhymed with ukulele.

 rst and threw it into second with naive abandon.

“I can go sixty in second,” he said.
He only reminded you once in a while that he was in his early

twenties. It was frightening to think what he would be like when he
really grew up.

When we reached the Back Lot the band was beating it out and

the music came at us like a Santa Ana wind.

“Will this be all right, Mr. Glick?” asked the headwaiter, showing

a lot of teeth in what was supposed to be a smile.

“No,” Sammy said, “I want that one over there.”
He pointed to a table practically in the middle of the dance  oor,

with a RESERVED sign you couldn’t miss.

“I’m very sorry, that one is reserved, Mr. Glick.”
“Balls,” Sammy commented.
“Really, Mr. Glick, you know if I could …”
“Balls, you just hang those signs out to try to give the joint a little

class.”

Kit started for the ladies’ room. “Let me know how it comes out,”

she paraphrased. “I’ll be in Number Three.”

People were beginning to look around. I tried to act as if I weren’t

with Sammy, for I hate headwaiter scenes.

“If I don’t get that table,” I heard Sammy say, “you’ll never get me

in here again.”

I could imagine what the headwaiter would like to have told him.

But we got the table.

We sat there without anyone taking our order for a minute or two

and then Sammy looked around and yelled, “Hey, waiter, gasson,
what do you have to do to get a menu in this place—send in your
agent?”

The waiter hurried over, grinning as if he loved being beckoned

that way.

“Never talk to waiters like that,” Kit said.
“Can I help it,” he said, “if I only went one year to  nishing

school?”

disciplining a small boy, “it just isn’t smart.”

the same way, a little peeved but making mental notes. I noticed he
was never too much of an egotist to take criticism when he knew it
would help. It was part of his genius for self-propulsion. I was
beginning to see what Kit had for Sammy. Of course she stood for
something never within his reach before. But it was more than that.
Sammy seemed to know that his career was entering a new cycle
where polish paid o . You could almost see him  ling o  the rough
edges against the sharp blade of her mind.

“I want a Scotch and soda,” said Sammy. “And don’t bother

sticking your thumb …”

He caught himself and made a nice recovery. “Have you two

made up your minds?”

I said Scotch and soda too.
Kit said Scotch and water.
The waiter had only taken a couple of steps when Sammy called

him back. “St. James, if you have it,” he said.

and I knew he must have picked that up since our last outing.

The band broke into a rhumba. Sammy rose and reached out his

hand for Kit.

“I feel like dancing,” he said with a cigar in his mouth.
“You don’t know how to rhumba,” she said.
“I can do as good as the rest of these jerks,” he said, and his voice

carried.

“I hate a bad rhumba,” she said. “There’s something about a bad

rhumba that’s indecent.”

“What do you think the rhumba is,” Sammy said, “a spring

dance?”

As he pulled her to her feet, not roughly but forcefully, he noticed

a swarthy, sideburned Latin who was dancing under the impression
that he was Veloz. “That guy looks like a leading man in a dirty
picture,” he laughed. Then he broke into song, singing through his

teeth and his cigar, with an exaggerated Jewish accent. “I’m a Letin
from Menhettin …”

“Now look,” she said, “either dance with me—or the cigar.”
Sammy was a crude dancer, but he wasn’t like so many bad

dancers who can’t make up their minds. Because he wasn’t self-
conscious about it and forced her to follow all his mistakes, he got
away with it. It wasn’t exactly a thing of beauty, but you had to
hand it to him, he had a sense of rhythm. Back in the New York
o ce if anybody had told me that three years later I would be
sitting in a Hollywood night club watching my copy boy dance the
rhumba with one of those Vassar smarty-pants I would have called
the Bellevue psychopathic ward to come down and take him away.
But now that I was actually at a ringside table watching it happen, I
couldn’t make myself feel too surprised. He had about as much
interest in dancing the rhumba as he had in writing. But I had begun
to take for granted his ability to do everything just well enough so it
wouldn’t break his stride.

She was dancing under wraps but looked as though she really

enjoyed it, even with Sammy. But not he. He looked desperate and
busy. He was working at it, he was working at having fun.
Recreation never seemed to come naturally to him. In fact the only
activity that did seemed to be that damned running. I don’t think he
ever drank because he liked the taste of whiskey or frequented the
Back Lot through any craving for hot music. He just went through
the motions of relaxing because he was quick to discover and
imitate how gentlemen of his rank were supposed to spend their
leisure. It wouldn’t have surprised me if this even extended to sex.
He seemed to be a lusty little animal, but I think if Zanuck o ered
to give up his job to Sammy on the condition that Sammy never
touch a woman again our hero would have gone impotent before
you could say general-manager-in-charge-of-production.

The waiter set our drinks up again. They went on dancing. I kept

an eye on Billie doing a little drink promoting at the bar. They came
back to the table because the  oor was getting too crowded, and the
waiter went for another round.

with frowning amusement.

barometer of any country’s society,” she said. “Just look at ours—no
more group spirit—every man for himself, covered with sweat and
trying to push all the other couples o  the  oor.”

distracting. I noticed that Sammy hadn’t been listening. He was
preoccupied with somebody on the other side of the room.

patient smile. “Go ahead,” she said, “go over and see him, you’re
practically over there anyway.”

Her voice was that of a mother trying to practice child psychology

on a delinquent child.

He rose, thrusting his cigar through his lips, and there was

something pugnacious about the way he clenched it between his
teeth in the corner of his mouth. It stuck out in front of him like a
cannon leveled at the world.

“I’ll try to get him over for a drink,” he said.
He didn’t circle the dance  oor to reach the other side. He walked

straight across it, pushing his way through the dancers.

“Who’s he sucking around now?” I said.
“A good-natured lush called Franklin Collier,” she said. “He was

married to one of the big silent stars, I forget-her-name. When she
got tired of him she packed him o  to Iceland to make a picture. He
surprised her and everybody else in town by not only coming back
alive but bringing Pengi with him.”

Pengi was the epic that was so beautifully acted by a cast of

penguins, one of the sensations of the twenties.

“Is Collier a good …”
She had the disturbing habit of beginning to answer your

questions before you had  nished asking them.

“He’s always had a  air for outdoor pictures,” she said. “He’s sort

of a one-man Last Frontier. But when it comes to stories, I don’t
think he knows his ass from a hole-in-the-script.”

they’re making you think they’re talking like men, but having to get
a running start for every word not considered  t for ladies or
dictionaries.

Sammy returned with a tall man in his late forties, with a red face

and bald spot, slimly built except for a pot belly which made me
think of a thin neck with a large Adam’s apple. He wasn’t navigating
too well under his own power and Sammy, almost a head shorter,
guiding him to our table, looked like a busy little tug piloting a liner
into port.

“Mr. Manheim,” Sammy said with his best Sunday manners, “I

want you to meet not only one of the greatest producers in town but
one of my favorite people.”

I almost expected Mr. Collier to start making an after-dinner

speech. I thought that was going a little too far, even for Sammy,
but Mr. Collier took it very gracefully, or perhaps it was only
drunkenly. He seemed to be bowing, but it turned out he was only
aiming his bottom cautiously at the seat of the chair. The waiter
brought his drink over from the other table and Collier stared into it
with an expression that might have been either thoughtful or
thirsty.

“Now what was I just saying, son?” Collier began.
“What Mr. Rappaport told you about my work,” Sammy

prompted.

have on his mind was to throw it into slow motion. “Rappy tells me
you did a hell of a job on Girl Steals Boy, Glick. Hell of a job.”

best when we see whether Mr. and Mrs. Public buy tickets.”

care what made money and what didn’t as long as their stu  went
over with the Hollywood  rst-nighters. And Sammy didn’t sound as
if he were exactly stabbing in the dark.

Collier looked around at us in triumph. “If only more of you

writers talked that language!”

“Well, you and I could talk pictures till all hours of the morning. But
I’m in a spot, son, hell of a spot, and maybe a bright young kid like
you can help me out. I’ve got Dorothy Lamour for a South Sea
picture that’s supposed to start in six weeks. It opens at the Music
Hall Easter week. It’s got a sure re title, Monsoon. All I need now is
the story.”

checking his  ow of words. “South Sea story! You’re looking for a
South Sea story! Well, of all the goddam coincidences I ever heard
of!”

Hold your hats, girls and boys, I thought, here we go again.
“Don’t tell me you’ve got one!”
“Have I!” Sammy yelled. “Is this a break for both of us! I’ve only

got the greatest South Sea story since Rain, that’s all.”

holding out on us.

“I’ll tell you something about me,” Collier said happily. “I never

made a mistake in my life when I played my own hunch. Something
just told me you might come through on this.”

precise, drunk-under-control hand: Glick—Monsoon.

asked us.

play us a little South Sea music.”

I tried to  gure out how she felt about him, but it wasn’t simple.

She was as eager as I to put him on the spot, but I don’t think she
was hoping to see him go on his trim little can the way I was. I
think she was just pushing him o  the high board because she
enjoyed the spectacle of seeing him straighten out and get his
balance before kni ng into the water.

It made me panicky just to imagine myself out on that kind of

limb, but Sammy didn’t even look ru ed. As the boys in the band
started working again, he said, in a voice buttered with boyish
sincerity, “Listen, Mr. Collier, I’d love to tell you the story now, but

it wouldn’t be fair to you. When you hear this story I want you to
hear it right. Now what if I came out to your house next Sunday?
…”

Sammy not only had his lunch date Sunday but Collier was urging
him to come early and try the pool.

question.

use? I’d split the sale with you.”

I stared at Sammy as if I were practicing to be an X-ray machine. I

just couldn’t seem to take him easy. Kit was leaning back, relaxed,
but with her eyes busy, as if she were enjoying a football game in
which she wasn’t rooting for either side.

couldn’t think of anything equal to the occasion. So all I  nally said
was “Sammy Glick,” using it like a swear word.

“A little birdie tells me that lunch is going to cost him just about

ten G’s,” Sammy said.

“This time you’ve lost me,” Kit confessed. “How can you sell

anything while you’re under contract? The studio owns everything
you write.”

coyly. “It wouldn’t be fair for the studio to own everything I wrote
before I came to Hollywood, would it? So who has to know when I
wrote my South Sea story?”

to believe he had really written one. The only answer I could think
of was, “What South Sea story?”

“Don’t worry,” Kit assured me, “he’ll have it. It would be di erent

if he had to write the greatest South Sea story since Rain overnight.
But he has three whole days.”

“That reminds me,” Sammy said, “what’s Rain about?”
“Holy Jesus,” I said with reverence.
“Sammy, now I know you’re a great man,” she said. “What other

writer in the world could compare his story, which he hasn’t

written, with a classic he’s never read?”

“I didn’t have to read it,” Sammy explained. “I saw the movie. But

I was such a little kid that all I can remember is Gloria Swanson
shaking her cute little can in a minister’s face.”

“That’s the plot all right,” she said. “What more can I tell you

about it?”

“Come on, Kit, stop the clowning, give out with Rain.”
Sammy was through playing for the evening. She began to tell

Maugham’s story. She told it well. You could feel the machinery in
his mind breaking it down. I kept my eyes on his face. Sharp, well-
chiseled, full of the animal magnetism that passes for virility, his
skin blue-complexioned from his close-shaved heavy beard adding
 ve years to his appearance, he was almost handsome. If it wasn’t
for that ferret look. In moments like this when he was on the scent
of something you could see the little animal in him poking its snout
into a rabbit hole.

giving way to the old Sadie again, Sammy suddenly leaned forward
and cut in.

“Wait a minute! I got an angle! I’ve got it!”
There was an old junk dealer in my youth who used to collect all

our old newspapers to grind into fresh pulp again. That was the kind
of story mind Sammy was developing. Without even warning us he
launched into one of the most incredible performances of
impromptu storytelling I have ever heard—or ever want to.

“All you gotta do to that story is give it the switcheroo. Instead of

the minister you got a young dame missionary, see. Dorothy
Lamour. Her old man kicked o  with tropical fever and she’s
carrying on the good work. You know, a Nice Girl. Then instead of
Sadie Thompson you got a louse racketeer who comes to the Island
to hide out. Dorothy Lamour and George Raft in Monsoon! Does that
sound terri c? So Dotty goes out to save George’s soul and he starts
feeding her the old oil. Of course, all he’s out for is a good lay, but
before very long he  nds himself watching the sunrise without even
thinking of making a pass at her. The soul crap is beginning to get

to him, see? He tells her she’s the  rst dame he ever met he didn’t
think about that way. Now give me a second to dope this out …”

gladly give him several decades, but he didn’t stop long enough to
hear me.

break down and sing in her choir every Sunday morning they get
caught in a storm on one of the nearby islands. They have to spend
the night in a cave huddled together. Well, you can see what’s
coming, she can’t help herself and lets him slip it to her. When they
realize what they’ve done they both go o  their nut. He goes back to
his booze, shooting his mouth o  about all dames looking alike
when you turn them upside down, and Dotty feels she’s betrayed
her old man, so she goes to the edge of the cli  and throws herself
into the ocean. But good old George manages to get there in time
and jumps in after her. Then you play a helluva scene in the ocean
where you get over the idea that the water puri es ’em. Jesus, can’t
you see it, George coming up for the third time with Dotty in his
arms hollering something like: ‘Oh, God, if You get us outa this—I’ll
work like a bastard for You the rest of my life.’ And you’re into your
 nal fade with Dorothy and George married and setting up shop
together, in the market for new souls to save.”

 nishes his routine.

There was a moment of respectful silence.
“Of course,” Sammy explained, falling back on the o cial

Hollywood alibi, “I was just thinking out loud.”

“But where,” I said, “does the monsoon come in?”
“Jesus,” he said, “I’m glad you reminded me. What the hell is a

monsoon?”

“A monsoon is a sequel to a typhoon,” Kit explained.
“Only bigger,” Sammy interpreted. “So the monsoon’ll have to be

coming up all the time they’re in the cave. It’ll be a natural for inter-
cutting. Symbolical. When she does her swan dive from that cli  she
lands right in the middle of it. That will really give the rescue scene
a wallop.”

how an ordinary ocean would purify them. But a monsoon makes it
convincing.”

“What do you think of it, Al?” he said.
“I don’t know much about art,” I said, “I only know what I like. I

think it stinks.”

it,” she said seriously.

Sammy turned on me with a leer not quite hidden in a smile.

“That shows what you know about story values, Al.”

was already beginning to show annoyance when his picture
judgment was questioned. I wasn’t especially interested in
qualifying for the job of Sammy’s future yes-man so I pressed my
point.

that you might sell it.”

“Well, what more do you want me to do with it?” Sammy said.

“Win the Nobel Prize for literature?”

“Haven’t you learned yet never to argue with Sammy about

himself?” she said. “That’s one subject on which I’m convinced he’s
infallible.”

“But why should you want to encourage crap like that?”
“You don’t really think what we say has anything to do with it

when there’s so much more encouragement at the other end, good
at any bank?”

Her voice was crisp and con dent.
I decided that I would always prefer to have her on my side.
“As long as they sell South Sea pictures before they know what

they’re going to be about,” she continued, “the kind of ad-libbing
Sammy just gave us will be a work of genius.”

is my child bride.”

“Look up the word genius in the dictionary sometime,” she said.
Sammy was lining up the plot on the tablecloth. “How the hell

can I get George to  nd out she’s drowning?” he said.

I stuck a cigarette in my mouth and Kit promptly lit it for me.
“Feel like dancing?” she said.
For some reason it reminded me of a night down in the Village

when a man invited me to dance. I wanted to go on talking with
her, but I knew I would feel foolish having to take her in my arms. I
don’t think I ever had that reaction to a woman before. I tried to beg
o  on the grounds that it would leave Sammy alone. But he said,
“Go ahead, dance. You know me, Greta Garbage, I von to be alone.”

As we rose Sammy’s hard, stubby  ngers snapped staccato.
“Know who Dorothy’s mother oughta be?” he said. “An exotic

little savage her old man converted. So when she starts going for
George she’s just reverting to type!”

“Don’t you think that psychology stu  is a little highbrow?” I said

over my shoulder, and we were out there on the  oor, set to music.

I felt like a kid at his  rst dance. Scared of getting too close to

her. I held her at arm’s length literally and otherwise. She was so
damned cool and well-groomed. Not only her clothes, but her face
and her mind. I had a screwy temptation to mess her up a little bit,
muss her hair, mix her up. She had it all down so pat. When it came
to understanding our little friend I felt she had a couple of laps on
me. My dancing wasn’t too good because I was conscious of not
being able to think of anything to say.

Finally, she had to start it. “How long have you been out here?”
“Not so very long,” I said. “I don’t know, maybe a month.”
“Suppose it isn’t fair to ask whether you like it or not?”
“I’m making twice what I was in New York, and the climate’s a

whole lot better. Why shouldn’t I like it?”

She smiled at me with so much understanding it was humiliating.

“Don’t worry, hardly anybody does at  rst.”

“How about the eminent author of Monsoon?” I said.
“They’re di erent,” she said.
I told her I could only see one Sammy Glick at that table, unless

the last couple of drinks had caught up with me.

“I meant all the Sammy Glicks,” she said.
“There is only one Sammy Glick,” I insisted. “I know. I met him

when he couldn’t have been much over seventeen. Why, I’ve

practically seen him grow up and …”

“I doubt that,” she cut in. “I don’t think Sammy Glick was an

adult at birth, but he must have become one very soon afterwards.”

“I hope you aren’t right,” I said. “For his parents’ sake. But I had

Sammy working out on me every day for years. And I’m willing to
swear on my option that he’s a unique contribution to the human
race.”

mates running in the same race.”

Glick in my life is all my constitution will stand.”

was a Glick. And so was the agent I just got rid of, Barney Burke.”

“God rest their souls,” I said.
“Of course, I will admit Sammy is an unusual model,” she said.

“With a special hopped-up motor. But he’s put out by the same
people.”

The only topic we had in common was Sammy—and I was afraid

of pushing that too far because I wasn’t sure how things stood with
them. The conversation hit an air pocket.

She could dance, all right. She danced the way professional

models walk, with a haughty e ortlessness. The only trouble with
her dancing was it made me feel pretty much the way her talk had.
She followed so well she seemed to anticipate me. At times it was
really hard to tell whether I was doing the leading or not.

it was only a beat between numbers and she started dancing with
me again.

“I love to dance,” she said. “But no one ever seems to think of

taking me dancing.”

“It’s a funny thing,” I said, “I’ve always liked to dance and yet I’ve

always been lousy at it.”

“You’re not a lousy dancer,” she said, “you’re fair. I like to dance

with fair dancers. For some reason they’re usually better guys.”

The music blared. Billie promoted. Sammy  gured. The crowd

pushed, and we pushed back, in time to music.

talk about next. Until she suddenly said, “I guess you’re his best
friend, aren’t you?”

There it was again. Beginning to haunt me. The wording of a

familiar Jewish phrase came back to me: My worst enemy shouldn’t
have such a best friend!

don’t think friendship is one of Sammy’s fortes.”

“He only has one forte,” she said, “himself.” She didn’t say it

bitterly: solemnly.

the  oor, feeling the music and getting to know each other.

The band struck its intermission chord. “Thanks,” I said. “Let’s go

back and see how W. Somerset Glick is getting along.”

She laughed. “Even Houdini couldn’t turn Rain upside down!” We

laughed with each other again. More than the remark deserved. I
couldn’t help taking her  gure in as I stood aside to let her lead the
way, single  le, to our table. Not as masculine as I thought. Athletic,
but not so much the Babe Didrickson type as the Helen Wills.

“The music’s getting on my nerves,” Sammy said as we sat down.
I was surprised to hear he thought he had them.
“What d’ya say we blow ’n’ go back to my joint? I wanna try my

story on you.”

“You remember us,” I said, “we were here for the  rst show.”
“Oh, hell that was just roughing it out,” he said. “Now I’ve really

got it licked.”

Half an hour later Kit, Billie and I were seated on Sammy’s
modernistic gray suede couch watching him like an audience. You
had to hand it to him. He was always improving. I mean, he was
becoming more and more expert at being Sammy Glick. The way he
was telling this story, for instance. He wasn’t outlining it, he was
acting it. What the story lacked in character and plot his enthusiasm
and energy momentarily overcame. As I watched him perform I

realized why he was repeating it. This must have been the only way
he could write, telling his story over and over to people who
supplied a line here, an idea there, until the story began to take
shape like a snowman forming hastily under many hands. Instead of
listening I found myself sifting the qualities which made his kind of
storytelling possible.

value of his work. He was able to feel that the most important job in
the world was putting over Monsoon. In the second place, he was as
uninhibited as a performing seal. He never questioned his right to
monopolize conversation or his ability to do it entertainingly. And
then there was his colossal lack of perspective. This was one of his
most valuable gifts, for perspective doesn’t always pay. It can slow
you down. I have sat in my o ce and said to myself, There are
twelve million of your fellow Americans unemployed this morning.
Who the hell are you? If that kept me from writing a line all
morning it might mean I had perspective. Or thinking how the
world was  fty million years ago and all the men who had their
chance at living in it and what that had to do with the big pay-o 
scene in Nick Turner—Boy Detective I was supposed to turn in by  ve
o’clock. That’s perspective too. Or just staring up into millions of
stars at night till you become molecular. Perspective is a  ne thing.
It can make you very unhappy. I couldn’t imagine Sammy ever
unhappy. Or happy either. I wondered what emotions he did have.
Perhaps only a burning impatience to be further, further on.

playing the parts.

Kit started to tell Sammy how to put a picture story together.

“The scenes can’t be like a lot of people gathered at random,
Sammy, even if they’re colorful people. A good picture should be
like a family tree. Every scene giving birth to the one that follows.”

You didn’t have to have much of an imagination to see the

tentacles of Sammy’s mind closing around that idea. I could almost
hear him explaining his theory of  lm continuity to Collier that
Sunday.

is worthy of you, but the acting is devastating. But deafeningly.”

seemed to get.

technique. Adolf and Benito have been doing it for years and look
where those boys are. What a marvelous pair of Hollywood phonies
they’d be! Can’t you just see them taking over a story conference?”

Sammy seemed rather  attered by the comparison.
“She’s right, Al,” he said. “Here’s a little motto your Uncle Sammy

made up himself—hang it up in your o ce—I’ll give it to you free:
Work hard, and, if you can’t work hard, be smart; and, if you can’t
be smart, be loud.”

“You sound like Moses,” I said, “proclaiming the Ten

Commandments from Mount Sinai.”

those Commandments of his. They’ve been playing him for a sucker
for three thousand years. At least mine work. For instance, just to
wise you up a little bit, take the  rst story conference I ever had out
here.”

picture of the producer, the supervisor, another writer and Sammy
trying to dope a good, quick way for the boy and girl to meet at the
opening of the picture.

All he says is corny, stinks or 1902. The other writer is a Caspar
Milquetoast with an expression on his face like he’s really thinking.
Looks like he needs an enema. I’m thinking too, but not about the
scene. I’m thinking I know from nothing about what I’m supposed to
be doing and any minute the producer who’s no deadhead is going
to  nd it out.

Like this, see?” Sammy tried to give us his interpretation of a timid
soul. It was a di cult part for him. “ ‘I wonder if it’s a bad idea to
have the landlady show the boy into a room she believes vacant but
actually is still occupied by the young lady?’

doesn’t even hear him at all. Everybody just goes on thinking. The
poor schlemiel looks around waiting for a reaction and ends up
talking to himself. ‘Yes,’ he says, ‘I guess it is.’ ” The poor schlemiel
turned out to be S. Henley Forster who has had more books
reprinted in the Modern Library than any living American writer.

“The dope probably doesn’t know it, but he showed me how to

smack a story conference. I sit there a couple of seconds till I’m sure
I have the producer’s eye. Then I start opening my eyes and sucking
in my breath like I’m just discovering America or something. Then I
start getting to my feet, slow, like this, looking at everybody as I
rise. Signi cantly.

“ ‘Wait a minute!’ I yell. I can feel them all moving in.
“ ‘Jesus H. Christ I’ve got it!’
“They look like I’ve slugged ’em over the head with sandbags. The

boss doesn’t even say swell or let’s have it. I can feel I’ve got ’em
already. Jesus, what a feeling!

“ ‘Here’s the boy,’ I says, ‘wandering through the rain in a strange

city looking for the cheapest room he can  nd.’ ”

Even for us Sammy turned his collar up and started trudging

through the rain.

“ ‘The landlady, a terri c old character, leads me up the rickety

stairs.” You’re in luck, young man,” she says to me, “there was
somebody in this room but she had to be out by six o’clock. I can’t
a ord to run a free mission around here.” ’ I’m not giving you the
dialogue, you understand, just ad-libbing, but you can see where the
dialogue can be terri c. Now we got suspense, see? We’ve got a
lonely kid that the audience is crazy about already and we’ve got
them wondering about the lovely young girl who’s just been turned
out into the cold.

“ ‘Now the door swings open. I walk in. All of a sudden I look up

and stop. Dead in my tracks. Staring …’

“That’s where I paused,” Sammy told us. “Let ’em have a moment

for the scene to sink in.

“ ‘The camera swings over and what do you think we pick up?—

our girl, half-dressed, just as little on as the Hays O ce will let us

get by with. She looks up—like a tigress— ghting for shelter. We’re
right into a helluva situation. It’s a terri c moment. I keep looking
at the girl. She keeps looking at me. Everybody in the audience
knows the battle I’m  ghting. How the hell can I take this room
tonight and throw this tragic little waif out into the gutter?’ ”

for his producer. “ ‘The landlady is talking to me, telling me she’ll
have the girl out of there right away. I don’t even hear her. And
then, do you know what I say? Without taking my eyes o  the girl I
ask the landlady, ‘How much does she owe you?’ And when she tells
me, I just say, ‘It’s paid,’ just like that, ‘It’s paid …’

had on any picture let me out of my contract and I’ll go back to my
old job of managing editor of the New York Record!’ ”

had fallen. “Jesus, I murdered them. The producer jumped up and
kissed me. Then he had me tell the whole thing through again. Then
he asked the supervisor and the other writer what they thought of it.
I wish I could have had a picture of that poor schlemiel’s puss when
he told the producer he agreed with it completely.”

Sammy’s laugh invited us to join in at Forster’s expense. His

excuse for dwelling on the story was its lesson for me. But from the
relish with which he re-enacted his crime you could see how the
experience fattened his pride. It made me realize more sharply than
ever what a peculiar phenomenon his pride was. He was prouder of
the method with which he had triumphed than if he had thought of
the original suggestion himself.

“Now I know what I have to do to become a successful screen

writer,” I said. “Take elocution and singing lessons.”

I tried to kid about it, but I was really depressed. For if making

the grade out here meant going through the song-and-dance that
Sammy had just presented, I felt I might as well start applying for
hand-outs at the Motion Picture Relief.

But Kit reassured me. “You may not believe it, but there are some

writers out here who really write. I’ve seen them do it on honest-to-
god typewriters, with my own eyes. Dudley Nichols, for instance. He

and John Ford have just done a job called The Informer that made
me want to wash my mouth out with soap for all the nasty things
I’ve been saying about Hollywood.”

sound like a job, instead of a happy hunting ground where the
customary weapons were a fabulous gall and a mouth energetic and
loud. I was settling down beside her, ready to hear more, when
Sammy came over and dropped his arm around her.

lousy with ideals.”

Out of his mouth that word sounded like something from a

foreign language.

“You know she’s on the Board of the Screen Writers Guild,” he

said. “She even got me to join her lousy organization.”

they were doing with each other. You could hardly call it an
intellectual companionship. And yet if it was love it was a new kind
on me. I think I had collected enough evidence to prove to myself
that the only love Sammy Glick was capable of was a violent passion
for his own future. And why a dame in her league wanted to play
around with a swift little rodent like Sammy Glick seemed to be one
for Dr. Freud.

ought to drag each other out of here before he starts charging us
rent.”

Kit showed Billie into the bedroom to get her hat and coat. I

didn’t know why I should have felt annoyed that she knew her way
around so well.

Sammy and I had a nightcap. I must have been a little further

gone than I thought, to tell him about my studio troubles with
Pancake.

you how to give that guy the  nger,” he said. He wanted to help me.
There was real benevolence in his voice, of his own peculiar brand.

“If you turn in one treatment with both your names on it and that

If you want to play it cozy, write a treatment of your own without
letting Pancake know and then get to your producer alone and tell
him you thought Pancake was so far o  the line it seemed faster to
straighten it out yourself. That way you’ve got a chance of scaring
him into bouncing Pancake o  the picture and grabbing yourself a
solo screenplay credit.”

whether I would ever make a screen writer or not, but I had no
illusions about my powers as a politician.

“Don’t be a sap,” he said. “You’ve heard of the survival of the

 ttest.”

somewhat more complex form.

“You can give it all the fancy names you want,” he said, “but

when you come right down to it it’s dog eat dog.”

But she had made herself very much at home. She had even let her
hair down. I never understood before what a nice  gure of speech
that was. Instead of the large, neat knot that gave her that brisk,
e cient look, it fell down over her shoulders now, softening her
face, making her look relaxed, almost girlish.

“So long, sweetheart,” Sammy said to me. “We’ll be previewing

some night next week. I’ll give you a ring when I  nd out what
night and we’ll all get together.”

early twenties, in his expensive shoes, in his brand-new  ashy
jacket, in his brand-new Horatio Alger mind, but still looking like a
kid o  the streets who had sneaked in and put on the clothes he
found in the closet. My best friend. My worst enemy shouldn’t have
such a best friend.

Back in my room, Billie and I had our moment and then as the
passion drained, our bodies returned us to what we really were,
casual acquaintances.

she said, “What’re you thinking about, honey?”

“Oh, just a lot of things, Billie,” I said. “Nothing much, I guess.”
“You know,” she said, “I like it with you a lot. You’re sweet.”
There was nothing ever sordid about sex with Billie. The way she

talked about it, it might have been surfboard riding or mountain
climbing, anything she happened to be good at and enjoy.

men have you been with?”

her answer startled me.

“Well, when I was fourteen,” she said, “I tried to keep track of all

the boys I knew. And when I was  fteen I tried to keep track of all
the boys I kissed. And when I was sixteen—but now I’ve even lost
track of that.”

She chuckled as if she had told a joke on herself.
“Billie, what do you think of Sammy Glick?”
She pulled the sheet up to her neck. “Oh, I don’t know. He’s a

pretty smart feller, all right.”

“You know what I mean,” I said. “How do you feel about him?”
This time she really seemed to think it over. “All I know,” she said

slowly, “is that I’d hate to go to bed with him.”

The principal furniture in Billie’s mind was a good-sized bed.
“Why, Billie?”
She hesitated, giggling with the embarrassment of anyone out of

the habit of probing ideas. “Oh, I don’t know exactly,” she said.
“I’ve always liked to do it because it’s just about the most fun you
get out of life and because—I bet you laugh at me for this—it’s
always seemed like the friendliest thing two people can do in the
whole world. That’s why I’ve never wanted to turn pro. But—I know
this sounds crazy—but somehow I’ve always felt that if I ever went
to bed with him—even if he didn’t pay me—I’d feel like I was doing
it for money.”

I kept turning that over in my mind as I was falling asleep and the

more I played it back the surer I was that Billie, in her own sweet
horizontal way, had said something more searching about Sammy

than anything I had been able to hit on yet. And I had been working
at it ever since the little copy boy burst into my o ce and launched
his undeclared war against the world.

OceanofPDF.com

You could see the beams of the giant searchlights ballyhooing

Sammy’s preview plowing broad white furrows through the sky.
“There it is,” Sammy said as we turned o  Sunset toward the
Village. The words came out of his mouth like hard, sharp-sided
pebbles. “Jesus.”

He meant those lights up there were spelling Sammy Glick. There

was no other word for the sound of pride mouthed with
apprehension.

There wasn’t much talking. Sammy’s mood always provided the

backdrop for the rest of us, and he was nervous. Even when he tried
to cover it with wisecracks, they were nervous wisecracks.

“What kind of a house is this?” he said.
“A tough one,” Kit said. “They only laugh when it’s funny, not

when it’s supposed to be funny. And they never cry when it’s
maudlin. Only when it’s pathetic.”

“Jesus,” Sammy said.
“And they’re preview-wise,” she warned. “They’ve had so many

previews out here that they all sound like little DeMilles. They
complain about the angles, and the smoothness of the dissolves, and
they even tell you what to cut.”

“The bastards,” Sammy said, “they better think my picture is

funny. I know it’s funny. I counted the laughs myself. One hundred
and seventeen.”

The theater entrance was full of excitement that came mostly

from women who were attracted to the leading man, and men
resentful or regretful that they would never go to bed with anybody
like the star, and unimportant people who idealized their envy into
admiration and kids who wanted to have more autographs than
anybody else in the world.

audience had his head turned toward the entrance. It looked crazy,
as if the screen had suddenly been set up behind their backs. They
were all watching for the celebrities to  ll up the loge section that
had been roped o  for them. I realized why Sammy had rushed us
through dinner. He wanted to be sure and get there before the lights
went out.

gone a couple of rows when we lost Sammy. When I looked around,
Sammy was practically in the lap of a digni ed, gray-haired man,
with a pink, gentle face, which was a little too soft around the
mouth.

“That’s his producer,” Kit said as I was about to ask. “Sidney

Fineman.” I looked again. Fineman was one of the magic names like
Goldwyn and Mayer.

was one of the few real old-timers still on top. He had written
scenarios for people who have become myths or names of streets
like Gri th and Ince. He was supposed to have one of the  nest
collections of rare books in the country.

“And it isn’t just conspicuous consumption,” she said. “His idea of

how to spend one hell of an evening is to lock himself in his library
alone. He built a special house for his books at the back of his
estate.”

The more she told me the more curious I was that a man like

Sidney Fineman should want to work with Sammy.

“Fineman isn’t the man he was  fteen years ago,” she said. “He

had just as much taste as Thalberg and more guts. Hollywood was
his girl. He loved her all the time. He had ideas for making
something out of her …”

I could see Sammy out of the corner of my eye. He had  nally

worked his way down to our aisle. He was leaning over two or three
people to shake hands with Junior Laemmele.

“But that’s all gone,” Kit was saying. “The Depression killed

something in him. Not only losing his own dough, but the big bank
boys like Chase and Atlas moving in on his company. He began to

get an obsession about the Wall Street bunch working behind his
back. He started playing safe. Now he’s just one of the top dozen
around town, making his old hits over and over again because he’s
scared to death that the minute he starts losing money they’ll take
his name o  the door. He’s convinced Sammy is a money writer.
And I have a sneaking suspicion who convinced him.”

Sammy ducked into the seat beside me as the credit titles came

on. I watched his face as his name  lled the screen:

ORIGINAL SCREENPLAY 

by 

SAMUEL GLICK

There is no word in English to describe it. You could say gloat,

smile, leer, grin, smirk, but it was all of those and something more,
a look of deep sensual pleasure. The expression held me fascinated
because I felt it was something I should not be allowed to see, like
the face of the boy who roomed across the hall from me in prep
school when I had made the sordid mistake of entering without
knocking.

Then Sammy leaned over and whispered something in my ear that

will always seem more perverse than anything in Kra t-Ebing.

“Just for a gag,” he said, “clap for me.”
The most perverse part of the story is that I did. There were my

hands clapping foolishly like seal  ippers. The applause was taken
up and spread through the house, not what you would call a
thunderous ovation, just enough of a sprinkle to make my hands feel
like blushing. It wasn’t bad enough that I had become Sammy’s
drinking companion. I had to be his one-man claque. My applause
couldn’t have been more automatic if Sammy had previously
hypnotized me and led me into the theater.

As I stared at that credit title I had a feeling that something was

missing. But it wasn’t until the screen was telling us who designed
the wardrobe and assisted the director that I remembered what it
was. Julian. Julian Blumberg, the kid who made the little snowball
that Sammy was rolling down the Alps. Granting that Sammy had

written, God knows how, the screenplay alone, the worst it should
have been was original story by Samuel Glick and Julian Blumberg
preceding the screenplay credit. But there it was, all Sammy Glick,
no Julian Blumberg.

Sammy whether he noticed anything funny about that screen credit
and when he didn’t, I enlightened him. It was like lighting a candle
in Mammoth Cave.

“That  rst story we did all went in the ashcan, Al,” he said in a

thick whisper. “I had to start from scratch. I know it’s a tough break
for the kid, but that’s Hollywood.”

“The hell it is,” I said. “That’s Sammy Glick.”
Kit said a sharp shhhhh.
As the picture was opening I was wondering whether I would

have agreed with Sammy about Hollywood before I met her.

The picture wasn’t anything that would come back to you as you

were climbing into bed, or even remember as you were reaching
under the seat for your hat; it was a good example of the comedy-
romance formula that Hollywood has down cold, with emphasis not
on content but on the facility with which it is told. It was right in
the groove that Hollywood has been geared for, slick, swift and
clever. What Kit calls the Golden Rut.

show going on in the adjoining seat. I never saw a man work so
hard at seeing a picture. “Eleven already,” he said to me a couple of
minutes after the picture started, and I realized he had a clocker in
his hand and was counting the laughs. And each time they laughed
he jotted down feverishly the line or the bit of business. And every
time they didn’t he’d mumble, “It’s that goddam ham—he’s
murdering my line,” or “That’s a dead spot they can kill when they
trim it.”

I just sat there watching him learn the motion-picture business.

He was an apt student, all right. He learned something about
pictures in  ve months that I’m just beginning to understand after
 ve years. Hollywood always has its bumper crop of phonies but
believe it or not Sammy was one of the less obvious ones. He was

smart enough to know that the crook who cracks his jobs too
consistently is sure to be caught. His secret was to be just as
conscientious about the real work he did as about the  lching and
 nagling.

to follow Sammy up the aisle but Kit grabbed my arm.

“Out this way,” she said. “It’s better.”
She indicated the emergency exit on the side. It led us to an alley

that ran around the theater. As we walked through the darkness
toward the street, Kit said:

picture.”

“Even if you did?”
“It isn’t that simple. Hollywood has a regular ritual for preview

reactions. When they know they’ve got a turkey they want to be
reassured. And when they have one that’s okay they expect
superlatives.”

She illustrated her point by telling the old Hollywood story about

the three yes-men who are asked what they think of the preview.
The  rst says it is without a doubt the greatest picture ever made.
The second says it is absolutely colossal and stupendous. The third
one is  red for shaking his head and saying, “I don’t know, I only
think it’s great.”

“Just the same,” I said, “I’m impressed. To tell the truth I didn’t

know Sammy had it in him.”

The only thing I have against those guys is that they’re like the old
Roman Caesars—every piddling little success becomes an excuse for
staging a triumph. And I just don’t happen to enjoy being dragged
along behind the chariot.”

When we reached the street Sammy was standing with half a

dozen men bunched on the curb in front of the theater. They all
seemed to be talking at once, though Sammy was doing his best to
drown them out. Kit pointed out the others besides Sammy and
Fineman, the director, the cutter, several other executives and the
cameraman. A couple of others were hovering around the edge,

mostly listening and reacting. Fineman and the director seemed to
be having an argument. The director was yelling that if they yanked
his favorite scene they could take his name o  the picture. Sammy
was supporting Fineman.

change the lettering on the marquee, and then Kit said, “These
sidewalk conferences are liable to last all night. Let’s go and have a
drink. He can meet us there.”

My mind kept remembering the way she had made herself at

home at Sammy’s as we left that night. It was crazy to let it annoy
me because I hadn’t even made up my mind yet whether I liked her
or not. I liked the way her mind drove at things but there was
something disconcerting about the way she kept you from getting
too close to her.

As we started for the parking station, she turned around and

called to Sammy briskly, “The Cellar.”

car. I knew him, but I couldn’t place him until he began to talk. Of
course it was Julian Blumberg.

He was unable to hide the terrible e ort it was for him to

approach me. You could see it was an act of desperation.

“Mr. Manheim, I don’t think you remember me …”
His eyes seemed to be forever crying. He kept cracking his

knuckles, shifting his balance and looking everywhere but at me.
The Jewish language has the best word I have ever heard for people
like Julian: nebbish. A nebbish person is not exactly an incompetent,
a dope or a weakling. He is simply the one in the crowd that you
always forget to introduce.

“Of course I do,” I said. “Glad to see you.”
I tried to make it sound hearty. He extended his hand as if he

expected me to crack it with a ruler. I could feel the perspiration in
his palm.

When I introduced him to Kit he gave her a preoccupied nod and

then, as if he had been sucking in his breath for it a long time, he
blurted out what he wanted to say to me. As with so many timorous
people when it  nally came out it sounded brusque and overbold.

“Mr. Manheim, I’ve got to see you right away.”
“Sure, Julian,” I said, “can you tell me what it’s about?”
He looked at Kit suspiciously. “Alone,” he said. “I want to talk to

you alone.”

should have been sore, but it was hard to miss the undertones in
Julian’s rudeness.

“All right,” I said, “will it take very long?”
The determination valve suddenly seemed to loosen and the

bluster leaked out of him. “Gosh, Mr. Manheim, I know I’m being a
nuisance but I wouldn’t think of bothering you like this unless …”

“How long would you say it would take?” I interrupted

impatiently.

“It’s—there’s quite a lot to tell. I’d say a couple of hours.”
I looked at Kit. “Why don’t you two go ahead?” she said. “I don’t

mind being alone.”

That was the trouble, I knew she didn’t mind being alone.
“I’ll tell you what you do, Julian. It’ll keep until lunch tomorrow,

won’t it? How about dropping around at the studio? Twelve-thirty
okay?”

He was so grateful it was painful. He backed away like an

awkward courtier, hoping he wasn’t being too much trouble and
thanking me again.

“Who is that damp little fellow?” Kit asked as she pressed her foot

on the starter.

I still didn’t feel I knew her well enough to tell her the story of

Girl Steals Boy. So I just said he was a writer Sammy and I knew in
New York who was out here looking for a job.

“No wonder he looked worried,” she said. “There were exactly

two hundred and  fty of us working today. The Guild keeps a daily
check-up. And do you know how many screen writers there are?
Nearly a thousand. With carloads of bright-eyed college kids
arriving every week—willing to do or die for dear old World-Wide
at thirty- ve a week.”

I don’t really believe that liquor will cure all the ills in our society.
But two or three healthy slugs often cure our curious inability to
know each other. Unless we know people well, we sit around with
our words and our minds starched, afraid of being ourselves for fear
of wrinkling them.

Down in the Cellar, after the  rst couple of drinks, I could feel us

loosening up with each other. It wasn’t in anything we said, it was
just that we seemed to like each other better and we both knew it.

di erent people came down the stairway and posed on the  nal
landing before entering the room.

When we had had enough of that game we found ourselves

playing a new one called How I Met Sammy. She asked me  rst. I
amused her for ten or  fteen minutes with a quick enumeration of
the highlights of Sammy Glick’s Mein Kampf, but doing a Will Hays
on the more extravagant of his achievements.

“I met him during the revolution we almost had last year,” she

said. “When Upton Sinclair was running for Governor.”

it.

when Upton Sinclair won the Democratic nomination by
announcing that he was going to End Poverty in California.”

crackpots,” I said.

“Oh, his script had plenty of holes all right,” she said, “but I think

it would have given the people a better run for their money than
Merriam’s—which hadn’t changed a line since Birth of a Nation.”

“Well, where does Sammy Glick come in?”
“He’s practically banging on the door now,” she said. “At the

height of the campaign World-Wide had a sudden loss of memory.
It’s funny how a little thing like the Bill of Rights can slip your mind
once in a while. They demanded that every employee contribute a
day’s pay to the Merriam fund. That was something I thought even
honest Republicans should resent, so I told them where to go, in my
prettiest profanity.

“A couple of days later I was sitting there in my o ce minding my
own script, when a total stranger burst into my o ce as if his pants
were on  re.”

“I’m Sammy Glick,” he said.
And waited as if that were all the introduction he needed.
“Whatever you’re selling,” she said, “I’m not in the market for

anything. I’m very busy.”

“You’ve got me wrong,” he laughed. “I’m the new writer just moved in

across the hall.”

“How chummy,” she said. “If you’re ever short drop over and borrow

a cup of dialogue.”

Because she had never heard of Sammy Glick she tried to discourage

him by turning back to her typewriter.

“That’s a honey,” he laughed, moving in. “I’ll hafta remember that

one.”

As she turned around she found herself looking into his face.
“Mr. Glick,” she began sweetly, “I suppose I ought to be hospitable and

welcome you to Writers’ Building C. And now that I have will you get the
hell out of my o ce and let me work? ”

She had chased her share of brassy guys out of the o ce, ad-space

salesmen and small-time agents and the usual studio lounge lice. When
sarcasm didn’t get them, a little pungent cussing would. But this one was
di erent. He settled down on the edge of her desk and looked over her
shoulder.

“I hear you’re working on Dancing Debs,” he said. “That oughta be a

swell credit.”

She rose, covered her typewriter, stu ed some of the papers on her

desk into a big envelope and slung her coat over her shoulder.

“Where you goin’?” he said.
“Where I can work,” she said.
“Hey,” he said, “don’t let me chase you out. I just dropped in for a

friendly chat. Thought I’d give you a tip that the front o ce knows
you’re the only writer on the lot who hasn’t come across for Merriam.”

executive o ce and told to shell out or get out. That job was taken over
by the stooges. The yes-men had a  eld day with their “all-for-your-own-
good-old-fellow” stu , coercion by innuendo in the best Hollywood style,
pouring it in the victim’s ear as if he were being told the latest studio
gossip.

Next morning Kit reached the lot a few minutes before nine-thirty and

had co ee at the studio diner before going to work.

Sammy was there, having breakfast and making verbal passes at the

waitress. When he saw Kit he slid over to greet her as if their  rst
meeting had been love at  rst sight.

“Which way do you come in the morning?” he asked. “Maybe you

could pick me up.”

“I come by way of Boulder Dam,” she said. “I’m sure it’s a little out of

your way.”

Of course the lead edit was about Merriam and Sinclair. Sammy began
to read it out loud. She picked up the paper and paid her check. He
followed her out. She walked faster, ignoring him. He trotted along
beside her desperately.

“Look, you’re a smart girl, you read the papers, you know how the

cards are stacked against this nut Sinclair  …”

She managed to lose him by turning into a convenient ladies’ room.
As she came down the hall he appeared at his doorway. She tried to

shut the door in his face but he slithered through like a cat.

about you,” he said. “Now why don’t you let me get on the phone and
tell Dan Young  …” Dan Young was the studio manager who had sent out
the notices about the day’s pay. Sammy reached for the phone.

Kit looked at him curiously.
“How long have you been in California?” she said.
“Four days.”
“So you’ve learned enough about the issues of the campaign in four

days to become a political adviser,” she said.

“How long does it take you to  nd out that the sun rises in the east?”

Sammy said. “One good look.”

“What do you know about Merriam?”
Sammy’s answer came prompt and glib. “He’s for law and order. He’s

a friend of the industry. He’s a right guy.”

“If the people push over the Merriam machine,” she stated quietly, “it’s

my guess they’ll  nd enough corruption crawling around under there to
keep all the starving lawyers in California busy the rest of their lives—
digging it out.”

“So what?” Sammy said. “Everybody knows about Jimmy Walker.

And he’s the best mayor New York ever had.”

to take Civics?”

“Sure,” he said. “What a laugh. The teacher giving us all that crap out

of a book when all we had to do to learn about politics was watch the
Tammany guy on the corner.”

have to lose it, but she didn’t want to lose it for a moment or two.
Anything on a large enough scale, even a pest, can be arresting.

him?”

dough in the State so everybody has the same. He wants to shut down the
studios and start a revolution.”

“Do you know he’s the regular Democratic candidate?” she said.
“What are you trying to give me?” Sammy said. “Merriam’s running

for the Democrats and Republicans both. Sinclair’s running for the
Communists.”

“This time,” she said, “you’ve been learning your politics on the wrong

corner. Sinclair got the heaviest vote in the history of the Democratic
primaries. The regular party machine is behind him. And the Communists
are running their own candidate.”

Sammy looked at her as if she were crazy. “Okay, okay,” he said. “All

I know is either you plunk for Merriam around here or you’re a dead
pigeon.”
That was where the smooth pavement on Kit’s patience ended. “Goddam
it,” she yelled, “comes the revolution I only want one favor of Comrade
Sinclair—to line you up against a wall and shoot you myself—and if you

don’t get out of my o ce by the time I count up to one, I won’t even wait
for the revolution!”

She told it vividly and I could see it happening: Kid Get-Ahead

being dropped right down in the middle of Hollywood’s most
violent controversy, taking a couple of turns in the air and landing
on his feet, with all the instinct for self-preservation of a scrappy
kitten.

“I really lost my temper,” she said. “You’d have thought that

would have been the end of it.”

“Oh, no,” I said. “Not me. Sammy’s built too much like a

boomerang. The harder you throw him out the faster he comes
back.”

“I’ve never seen anything like it,” she said. “Two hours later he

was trying to get me to have lunch with him. That afternoon he
called me on the phone about the Merriam business again. I hung up
on him and he called me right back and said we were cut o .
Finally, I went to Sidney Fineman, who was my producer then, and
told him I wasn’t being paid to vote for Merriam but to turn in the
best script I could. And that a leech across the hall that called itself
Sammy Glick was pestering me so much about my day’s pay to save
the industry that he was ruining the chances of one of its pictures to
show a pro t. Sidney was sympathetic. He made it pretty clear that
he wished he could resist the pressure himself.
“Of course, I felt a little guilty about snitching on my neighbor that
way. Even a neighbor like Mr. Glick. But the next time we met in
the hall he had a smile not only from ear to ear but all the way
round the back of his neck.”

“Thanks, baby, for the plug you put in for me.”
All she could do was look and sound bewildered.
“You musta told some of the top guys I was after your dough for

Merriam. That’s what I need. That gets ’em talking about me, see. Hell,
every punk on the lot has laid it on the line for Merriam, so that adds up

to nothing. But this way they all hear about it. Next time they hear the
name Sammy Glick it rings a bell in their brains.”

“I’ll bet he was wetting his pants he was so scared his name might

never ring those bells,” I said.

“I doubt it,” she said. “I don’t think Sammy knows how to be

afraid. He’ll probably learn it out here, because this place is full of
fear. But when he does I think something will have gone out of him.
Like a tomcat I had castrated once.”

“Were you afraid?”
“When I was holding out on that Merriam thing? Of course.

Terri ed. All my heroics were strictly on the surface. Maybe that’s
where heroics always are.”

“And was Sammy right—about your being a dead pigeon?”
“No,” she laughed. “They wouldn’t even  re me, thank God. In

other words those threats turned out to be a super-colossal blu .”

“That’s a helluva way to start a friendship,” I said. “I thought

mine was queer. But yours is absolutely bughouse.”

“Maybe friendship is the wrong word,” she said. “I used to

wonder why I kept seeing him after the Merriam a air blew over. I
think it was the sense of excitement I seemed to feel around him. I
don’t know, he does something to the air you breathe, intensi es it.
Haven’t you felt it? Know what it reminds me of sometimes? A shrill
note held too long. Makes you want to scream.”

“I didn’t know you ever let anything get you like that,” I said.
It was spoken with an irritation that made her smile. “It bothers

you.” There was that disconcerting habit of stating unnecessary
questions as facts.

I hadn’t realized how much it bothered me until I began to talk

about it. “Everything about you and Sammy bothers me. That night
I left you at Sammy’s, for instance. That bothered the hell out of
me.”

We looked at each other until we weren’t acquaintances any

more. After the pause, she didn’t change the subject, only the
direction of it.

“I’m sorry for him.”
“Sorry for him! Sorry for Sammy Glick?”
“I have a crazy theory about that,” she said. “You know the

cripple who peddles papers outside the Derby? We’re sorry for him
because a germ he didn’t have anything to do with got inside him
and twisted him out of shape. Maybe we ought to feel the same way
about guys with twisted egos.”

“But the kid with the papers is helpless.”
“So is Sammy,” she said. “In his own way. Ever have him tell you

anything about his childhood?”

I could do with it.

“Try to think of it this way,” she instructed. “There was an

epidemic raging in that neighborhood of his—more contagious than
polio—and he caught one of the worst cases on record.”

for Sammy was coming down the stairs, making a triumphal
entrance with Sidney Fineman. Sammy lingered to shake hands
around the  rst table. You could tell from the faces that he was
being congratulated. By some inexplicable telepathy, news of his
success had preceded him. It seemed to me to be black magic, for
the people congratulating him had been at the Cellar when we
arrived. It had Kit stopped too. She said that one of the things which
distinguished the old Brown Derby on Wilshire was the way guests
at one end of the room could hear distinctly every word being said
at the other, because of the trick acoustics of the dome-shaped
ceiling. And that it always seemed as if all Hollywood must be
covered by one of those Derby ceilings.

Fineman and his party found a table and Sammy continued his

victory march down the aisle until he reached us. From the moment
he sat down, the conversation continued to be about Sammy Glick,
but in a di erent key. It was Variation on an Old Theme by Glick,
allegro con spirito.

It would have been deadly if Sammy hadn’t been hopped up with

success. He sprayed us with words like a verbal machine gun. He

described every detail of the evening just as if we hadn’t been there
at all.

ticket. But I’d be a fool to move in yet. Why not wait till it’s held
over a third week at the Music Hall and starts to clean up in the
sticks? By that time I’ll be able to spit in the boss’s eye and make
him like it.”

I had never seen him so wound-up before. He seemed to have

memorized every word of praise he had received all evening. He
told us how the cutter had said that even though the picture ran
eighty- ve hundred feet it moved so fast it could stand that footage.
And what the theater manager had said. He went on talking about
Sammy Glick with such  aming enthusiasm that so help me God I
could feel the excitement beginning to catch in me.

The e ect was hypnotic, like hearing a record over and over

again: So I told Fineman  …  I’m in a terri c spot  …  My picture  …  I
said  …  I…

he was sticking his face right into your plate and the words into
your mouth. If you have ever seen Henry Armstrong  ght you know
how Sammy was learning to talk, leaning against you, never letting
up, swarming all over you as he forced you back and back.

I watched for an opening and when Sammy had his mouth full of

his last bite of steak sandwich I made a motion that we adjourn.

lot.”

Hurrying importantly down the stairs was a beefy middle-aged

man whose clothes were dapper, if not his body. Nine-tenths of his
silk handkerchief was hanging out of his breast pocket. His eyes
seemed too small for his large face, and too close together. He
looked like a con dence man, but a con dence man who had risen
to the position of employer of other con men.

I noticed that Kit and Sammy stopped talking to watch him, that

people at other tables were doing the same thing. Kit kept her eyes
on him as he entered the room. “You can stop worrying about that
review, Sammy,” she said. “You’re in.”

“Jesus,” Sammy said. “I gotta read it.”
The note of anxiety that had been there before the preview was

back again. He was o  to Fineman’s table on the double-quick.

said. “But when you start getting wireless messages …”

impressive until you go behind the scenes.”

“Let’s go,” I said.
She led me o  on a little verbal tour through Darkest Hollywood.
“All I had to do was watch the guy who just came in. Gabby

Hanigan, who runs the Megaphone.”

“What do you mean, watch him? Who’re you, the girl with the X-

ray eye?”

come in after previews this way for years. When he’s written a rave
he’s giving you the big hello all the way down the stairs. But you
can always tell when he’s thrown the hook into you because then he
just gives it this …” Her hand made two quick  uttery motions and
stopped. “So this time it looks in the bag. Gabby was waving to
Fineman like a Boy Scout the moment he came into sight.”

She was right. Sammy came trotting back with a proof copy of the

review. He rolled it out on the table for us with a  ourish.

“Read that,” he said crisply, and he shook his head as if further

expression failed him. “Tuhri c.”

It was. You could almost hear the headline screaming: “GIRL” CINCH

B.O. SMASH. Kit began to read it out loud, with an ironic in ection
which Sammy was too intoxicated to appreciate. It read like a press-
agent blurb. It drooled over Fineman’s showmanship, the acting, the
directing, the photography. It didn’t say anything about them except
that they were all wonderful. And Sammy had a whole paragraph to
himself. He was hailed as a brilliant addition to the ranks of
Hollywood writers. The reviewer seemed especially impressed with
his craftsmanship and originality.

“Sammy,” I said, “tell me the truth. Is Gabby Hanigan your

father?”

hundred smackers.”

mentioned the word bribe.

“What do you mean bribe?” Sammy said. “They just came in a

couple of days ago trying to sell me a full page ad and when I told
them I’d think it over and let them know after I read the review,
they said not to lose any sleep over it.”

“I beg your pardon,” I said. “I didn’t mean to jump at

conclusions.”

I was mysti ed again. And with good reason. How could Sammy

get so upset about a review that was already in the bag?

“There you have your  nger on my favorite Hollywood foible,”

Kit said. “I don’t know how many times I’ve sat in this very room
with producers who were absolutely sweating blood to read a
review they had already made sure of. And not only that, but gloat
over it like children when it  nally arrived.”

I said I couldn’t believe it. But Sammy could. “That’s not so crazy

as it sounds,” he explained. “This Hanigan guy is nobody’s fool. I
hear he likes to cross you up once in a while, just to keep you
guessing.”

“Why the hell does Hollywood let him get away with it?” I said.
“Because there are still too many people out here more interested

in boosting their own stock than in making pictures,” Kit said. “As
long as they’re around we’ll have our Hanigans and our canned
reviews instead of the real, slugging criticism that might do some
good.”

Sammy was signing the check. “Come on, smarty pants,” he said.

“Reform the industry tomorrow. Tonight we celebrate.”

The Triangle Club wasn’t Monte Carlo, but it was the best
Hollywood could do. You had the old thrill of being stared at
through a peephole and feeling privileged as the door swung open.
This was partly for the e ect, partly because gambling was illegal in

Los Angeles and they had to slip the city machine something for
protection. It was the place the top producers liked after working
their guts out until midnight, hoping to slow down with champagne
cocktails,  ve-dollar steaks and a couple of grand tossed away at
roulette before trying to catch up with a little sleep that was as
restful as a Vorkapich montage.

grab his hand. They all seemed to know he had a hit. That was the
Hollywood grapevine clicking again, the thing about it that
impressed me most—a gigantic industry involving thousands of
people situated in a boom town with a village psychology. Take out
the cyclamen drapes, the lush carpet, the mirrored bar, and all the
rest of the trappings, and you would have the village beer joint. For
hardly anywhere else could Sammy have become so quickly known
or his exploits so discussed.
I don’t remember much about that night except that Sammy kept
buying us champagne and blew  ve hundred bucks at the crap table
(and told everyone it was a thousand) and Kit tried to explain that it
wasn’t really a loss because a guy called Veblen said we make our
reputations by how much money we can publicly throw away, and I
tried to get her to come home with me which even surprised me and
made me realize how much champagne Sammy must have bought,
and I lost my week’s salary at blackjack which is strictly a sucker’s
game, and I began seeing Sammy’s face exploding around me like a
pinwheel, and when I asked myself What makes Sammy run? a
woman’s voice answered How many times are you going to ask me
that? and I said, “Pardon me, but I don’t think we’ve met,” and the
answer came, “Of course we have, you’ve been to my house for
dinner,” and even then she had to repeat it several times before I
could realize that the woman in my arms was Mrs. Henry Powell
Turner and that somehow the Triangle Club had disappeared and
the walls that were spinning around belonged to my room at the
Villa Espana.

OceanofPDF.com

Fifteen minutes early, Julian’s hesitating voice trembled up to me
from the reception room. I hated to keep him waiting because I
know how it is when you’re down; the most trivial slight becomes
persecution. But I didn’t want to leave too soon in case my producer
called. Writers usually cover up for each other, but I couldn’t trust
that bitchy streak in Pancake.

When I went downstairs I found Julian looking even more

miserable than the night before. “It’s awfully nice of you  …” he
began.

“Let’s see,” I said, “where shall we eat?”
I ran through the usual list automatically. “Like Chinese food?”
Anything, he would eat anything.
“Good,” I said, “there’s a pretty good little Chinese place around

the corner.”

A Chinese joint is usually a good place to talk, because it’s almost

always empty and the waiter is so busy reading his language paper
in the back that he barely has time to drop his plates and run. It’s
easier to talk around waiters who seem more interested in
something they can’t wait to get back to.

I ordered egg foo yong and cold pork and Julian thought a while

and decided he would have the same and I yelled after the waiter to
throw in a bottle of sake. Then I waited for Julian to begin.

He leaned forward uncomfortably, nervously cracking his

knuckles.

“Don’t crack your knuckles,” I said. “It’s bad for your hands.”
He dropped his hands into his lap in embarrassment.
“I know,” he said. “Blanche keeps telling me.”
“Who’s Blanche?” I said.

Manheim,” Julian said. “But that’s what I wanted to talk to you
about. Blanche is my wife. And she’s going to leave me.”

Julian always have to be the  rst ones married?

engaged all through high school. We’ve always been crazy about
each other. And now …”

His voice trailed o  like a distant radio station fading and I had to

wait for it to come back again. “Now she says she’s going back to
New York.”

do anything about.

After all he’d listen to you—you’re a good friend of his.”

Please, Julian, I thought. When you say that, smile.
But that would have been asking too much of him at the moment.

It struck me that Julian and Sammy must have been just about the
same age, twenty-two or -three, probably brought up in the same
kind of Jewish family, same neighborhood, same schooling, and
started out with practically the same job. And yet they couldn’t have
been more di erent if one had been born an Eskimo and the other
the Prince of Wales. And there were so many Julian Blumbergs in
the world. Jews without money, without push, without plots,
without any of the characteristics which such experts on genetics as
Adolf Hitler, Henry Ford and Father Coughlin try to tell us are racial
traits. I have seen too many of their lonely, frightened faces packed
together in subways or staring out of thousands of dingy rooms as
my train hurled past them on the elevated from 125th Street into
Grand Central, too many Jewish nebs and poets and starving tailors
and everyday little guys to consider the fascist answer to What
Makes Sammy Run? And yet, if the same background that produced
a Sammy Glick could nurture a Julian Blumberg, it wasn’t an open-
and-shut case of environment either. I  led a mental note to mull
over Kit’s idea again, that Sammy’s childhood environment was the
breeding ground for the predatory germ that thrived in Sammy’s

blood, leaving him with one of the most severe cases of the
epidemic.

and Sammy …?”

Manheim, even that wouldn’t be as bad. It isn’t my wife that Glick’s
stolen—it’s my—my whole life.”

only cried.

story, I’m with you. But I don’t see what I can do about it, Julian.”

Manheim.”

“My name’s Al,” I said.
“I’m sorry,” he said. “But that was just the beginning. Jesus, if I

could only have my job in the ad department back and go on
writing my novel at night. I can’t even write any more, Mr.
Manheim. Honest to Christ, if I had a little more guts I’d throw
myself o  that bridge in Pasadena.”

His voice threatened to get away from him.
“Hold it,” I said. “You better eat that while it’s hot. There’s

nothing lousier than cold Chinese food.

“Then begin at the beginning. Take your time. And telling me

how upset you are won’t do either of us any good. Try to hold
yourself down to the facts.”

I poured the sake and he wet his lips with it. When he began

again he dropped his voice to a  at monotone to keep it steady.

It seems that Rosalie Goldbaum wasn’t the only one waiting for a letter

when Sammy went west. Sammy was supposed to lay the groundwork for
Julian and let him know the moment he found an opening. So Julian
kept his little job in the ad department, waiting for Der Tag. But the only
news of Sammy he ever had was via Parsons’ column. Finally, Blanche
made him sit down and write a letter. It was long, plaintive and
unanswered.

One night he came home from his job to  nd Blanche packing. For the

vacation in the Catskills she had been wanting? No, to California, to
Hollywood.

“But Blanche!” he said. “We haven’t heard from Sammy Glick. How

can we go to Hollywood?”

Julian had passed through so curiously untouched.

“Sit down and eat your dinner before it gets cold, Julie,” she said.

“We’re going to California in the secondhand car I bought with part of
the story money this afternoon. We’re going to pay a little visit to that
friend Glick you were all the time telling me was doing so much for you.”

“Blanche, you sound mad. Don’t be mad at me,” he said.
“Oh, don’t be silly, I love you,” she said furiously. “If I didn’t love you

it wouldn’t get me so sore to see you let a gonif like Glick make a dope
out of you when I know you could be a  ne writer. Now sit down and
eat so you can get through and help me pack.”

crossing the Continental Divide, Julian drove a hundred miles out of their
way one night when Blanche fell asleep and when they arrived in
Hollywood Sammy wouldn’t see them.

They called the studio every day for a week, but Sammy was never in.

They couldn’t reach him at home because the studio wouldn’t tell them
where he was living. They frequented places they couldn’t a ord, hoping
to run into him. It wasn’t until their money had dwindled to the margin
Blanche had laid aside in case they had to drive East again that Julian
managed to get Sammy on the other end of a telephone.

Sammy dispensed with the overtures. His voice grated: “Listen,

shtunk, for Chri’sake who the hell told you to come out here?”

“But Mr. Glick, I thought  …”
“The hell you did. If you thought you would have stayed home. Didn’t

I tell you I’d send for you when the time came?”

“Yes, but I didn’t think it would take  …”
“Listen, kid,” Sammy’s voice suddenly soft-pedaled. “Don’t think I’m

having any cakewalk. As soon as I get set I’ll be able to  x you up, but
right now they’ve got me going around in circles.” He paused, trying to

suck Julian in on the laugh. “I guess we’re just a couple of kids who
didn’t know when we were well o , hey, Julian?”

Glick, I told Blanche you wouldn’t give me the runaround. There must be
some way you could get me in. Not even as a writer. Maybe the story
department could use a  …”

“Look, do you wanna be smart?” Sammy told him. “Get the hell out of

this lousy town and back to New York. You won’t have a prayer around
here until the fall anyway—the summer’s always slow  …” Then his voice
tensed and quickened. “Listen, pal, they’re calling me for a conference.
I’ll shoot you a wire the  rst time anything looks hot—now be a smart
guy like I toldya. Have a nice trip back.” And he cut Julian o .

I don’t know how he looked when he really hung up that phone

but the secondhand version he gave me in the booth of that Chinese
restaurant was the closest I ever want to come to it. His pale blue
eyes were pink-rimmed and his skin looked too thin to hold his face
in. It was not a weak but a sensitive face, which seemed to be
characterized by the gentle curve of a delicate nose.

“For days I didn’t even have the nerve to tell Blanche I had talked

to him,” Julian said. “I knew what she would say and I felt like a big
enough sap already. You know, love is a funny thing, Mr. Manheim.
There never was anything small or sel sh about Blanche, and yet I
think things would have been better between us if I could have
come home with that writing job.”

So he spent three weeks riding the street cars and the buses and trying

to get by the studio reception desks. His Hollywood wasn’t that exclusive
night club where everyone knew everybody else. He learned that
Hollywood extended from Warner Brothers at Burbank, in the valley
beyond the northern hills, to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, twenty- ve miles
southwest in Culver City. He found a new side of Hollywood, the ten-
man-for-every-job side, the seasonal unemployment, the call-again-next-
month side. The factory side. He learned how many Julian Blumbergs
there were, who found nothing but No Admittance signs, for every

Sammy Glick who opens the lock with a wave of his cigar like a magic
wand.

It wasn’t until he had made the rounds of all the major studios and

began ringing doorbells on Poverty Row that he had his  rst nibble. A
shoestring producer told him he had bought the stock shots from Hell’s
Angels and Wings and needed an airplane story with no more than
three principal characters, in as few interiors as possible.

He worked all week and when the producer told him he seemed to be

on the right track he put in another feverish week,  nishing a thirty-page
outline of a tight little melodrama. The producer’s secretary (who was
also his entire sta ) asked Julian to leave the manuscript with the
assurance that if it were approved he would be hired. Two weeks later it
was returned in the mail, with a brief, formal note.

An unemployed writer in the hotel put him wise. Julian had fallen for

a familiar Poverty Row economy gag. The producer encourages as many
as a dozen aspiring writers to work on his idea. They knock themselves
out over his story for two or three weeks in return for nothing but the
vaguest of promises. Then the producer comes out of it with enough free
ideas to nourish the one writer he  nally hires.

When Julian heard this there was nothing to do but make a full

confession to Blanche and throw the suitcase into the back seat again.

The drive back took them three days longer than they expected

because of a short in the battery and the piston rings’ wearing out. They
had the trip budgeted so carefully that they reached Blanche’s parents’
apartment in the Bronx with exactly forty-three cents.

“So you can imagine how we felt when we read this telegram,”

Julian said. “Mother said it had been waiting there several days. I
saved it as a souvenir of my Hollywood career.”

His mouth smiled, but nothing happened to his eyes. “It’s turned

out to be the only item in my collection.”

He handed me the over- ngered, often-folded telegram. I read it,

and then I read it again, and then again. It was like hearing Sammy
Glick’s voice in the room.

DEAR JULIAN. HERE IS GREATEST BREAK OF YOUR LIFE. HAVE SCREEN-WRITING JOB FOR YOU. ENCLOSING

MONEY FOR IMMEDIATE AIRLINE TRIP TO HOLLYWOOD FOR YOU AND WIFE. WIRE COLLECT WHEN I SHOULD

MEET YOU AT AIRPORT. YOUR PAL

SAMMY

down jalopy they were  ying back again via TWA. Sammy was waiting
at the airport. He threw his arms around Julian like a brother. Five
minutes later they were in the car Sammy had hired, rushing back to
town.

straight for the studio.

wasn’t losing a moment. He sat Julian down, handed him a script and
told him he could start working.

Julian 
began 
reading 
obediently, 
too 
busy 
to 
notice 
Blanche’s

suspicions. What kind of a job was this that kept them from the studio?
she wanted to know.

“Lots of writers work at home,” Sammy said. “I told them I thought it

would go faster here. And to tell you the truth—you aren’t exactly on the
payroll yet, Julian.”

“Oh,” said Julian.
“Not exactly?” said Blanche.
“I’ll come clean with you,” Sammy said. “The studio canned the writer

who was working with me because they seemed to think I could get along
better alone. But I  nd I haven’t got time to knock the script out myself
so I thought it would be a swell idea to get you out here to give me a
hand. And as soon as you have a couple of scenes under your belt it’ll be
a cinch for me to get you a regular job by showing ’em what you can do.
Meanwhile you can move in with me and I’ll loan you twenty- ve a week
to keep you going till you’re on your feet.”

It didn’t sing like the telegram. But at least it was an in and even

Blanche was willing to ride along.

Julian rolled up his sleeves without knowing the di erence between a

fade-in and a stand-in. He stayed up all that night reading one
screenplay after another, getting the feel of it. By morning he discovered

that he was able to  nd holes in the script that grew out of the bizarre
collaboration of S. Henley Forster and Sammy Click. Twenty-four hours
after he arrived he was rewriting the  rst scene and he kept batting out
scenes for the rest of the week in eighteen-hour stretches. The plan was
for him and Sammy to write alternate sequences. Only Sammy was
always being called to conferences at the studio that lasted most of the
day. But he explained to Julian that he was still carrying the brunt of the
work as he was going ahead and laying out the ensuing scenes. In his
mind.

writing scenarios all his life. When Sammy read his work all he said was,
“This stu  sounds okay,” but Julian noticed that he didn’t waste any
time racing o  to the studio with it.

small town on a large scale with simple, modest houses separated by
small, neat lawns. It was Julian’s last day before he was to take his place
with Sammy at the studio. They rode to the end of carlines, holding
hands and giggling like kids. They felt as if they were taking the  rst
deep breath since they arrived. It was fun to remember that this was late
winter, with the green trees and the warm sun. Blanche wondered
happily how long it would take for this crisp heat to dry up Julian’s
sinuses. They even stopped in to ask the rent of one of the cute little
stucco bungalows on Orange Grove Avenue. Fifty dollars a month with a
small yard of their own and two orange trees, tiny ones but each with a
real orange.

bad news. “Tough luck, kid,” he said. “I’m afraid your scenes didn’t go
over like I thought they would.”

He let Julian feel just lousy enough before adding:
“But I haven’t lost faith in you. In fact just to show you where you

stand with me I’m going to throw in ten bucks a week extra with that
twenty- ve.”

That was more money than Julian had ever made before, enough for

him and Blanche to take a  at of their own in one of the cheap
apartment houses above Hollywood Boulevard.

at the studio now, but he thought it would be good practice for Julian to
go on writing through the script and promised to go over his scenes with
him and give him pointers, to help him learn the trade.

assignment, Julian didn’t like to sit around without writing so he started
working on an original called Country Doctor because he thought it
would help Sammy plead his case at the studio. He was almost too
frightened of Blanche’s beautiful and brutal candor to tell her the story,
but she surprised him by saying, “Julian, if you were only as smart as
you knew how to write! It doesn’t matter how much money there is in
this story as long as you make sure it says—By Julian Blumberg. So the
big shots will  nally  nd out my pupsie is a writer.”

and he had it  nished in a week. For the next three days he wondered
whether it was good enough to show to Sammy. He had decided it wasn’t
when Sammy came to him and said, “Say, I read that yarn of yours
Blanche showed me. It’s pretty fair—got a couple of nice moments. I’ll
see what I can do with it.”

“Well,” Julian said,” weeks went by and it looked like he’d

forgotten all about my story, so I started helping him with his next
screenplay because there didn’t seem to be anything better to do.
And then one day Blanche happened to be reading through the trade
papers and found this:

He handed me a ragged little clipping. I was beginning to feel like

a district attorney. “Exhibit B,” I said.

Sammy was running through the room again as I started to read:

“Sammy Glick makes it two in a row as his latest original, Country
Doctor … ” and handed the squib back.

What a two-scene that must have been, Julian’s stammering

request for an explanation—Sammy hammering back at him:

“Listen, Julie, don’t be a schlemiel all your life. Everybody thinks I’m

hot at the studio right now. So I saw a chance of smacking them for a
bonus that means twice the dough they’d pay a Julian Blumberg.” He

made the name sound like a cussword. “Jesus Christ, what the hell have
you got to bitch about when I’m putting the money in your pocket?”

“But it isn’t fair  …”
“No fair,” Sammy mimicked. “Like they say in sissy schools. No fair!

For Chris’sake, grow up, this isn’t kindergarten any more, this is the
world.”

That was one of the most philosophical observations Sammy ever

made.

I was beginning to feel like a groggy  ghter waiting for his

manager to toss in the towel and Julian seemed to sense this, for he
said, “Well, there isn’t a whole lot more to tell, Mr. Manheim …”

My God, more! I thought. If what he had been telling me were

supposed to be  ction I would have broken in ten minutes ago to
tell him his story was hopeless hyperbole. But you could tell Julian
was telling the truth. It’s strange that a writer as gifted as Julian
could be so stupid that he was incapable of telling anything but the
truth. I believed him because truth is never hard to recognize.
Nothing is ever quite so drab and repetitious and forlorn and
ludicrous as truth.

“I guess you must have thought I was a little shell-shocked when

you saw me after the preview last night. Well, maybe I was. Because
that picture was the biggest shock in my life, Mr. Manheim. How do
you think you’d feel going in to a movie cold and suddenly starting
to realize you’re hearing all your own scenes?”

Oh, God, I thought, I’m going to explode. Sammy Glick is a time

bomb in my brain and it’s going to go o  any moment and blow me
to bits.

“The whole picture,” Julian was saying. “All those scenes I

thought I was just doing for practice—actually showing on the
screen—all mine—every line, mine—you know what I felt like
doing, Mr. Manheim? I felt like jumping up right in the middle and
screaming. I wanted to tell everybody there that the only line Glick
wrote on Girl Steals Boy was the by-line on the cover. I felt like
telling all of them that now I know why he had me  y out in such a

hurry—because when he got the other writer bounced he knew he
couldn’t stay on the picture alone—he didn’t dare.”

psychopathic ward, but it would have been worth it.”

throwing up, in the men’s room. And when I came out Blanche
made me talk to Sammy right away. I’ve seen Blanche mad, but I’ve
never seen her like that before. I thought it might be better to wait
and see Sammy in the morning. But she said either I saw him right
then and there—or she’d go home and move out. You see, Blanche
is a funny kid, Mr. Manheim. To look at her you wouldn’t think she
was anything but a nice, frail little Jewish girl. But …”

“So you did have a talk with Sammy last night?” I said.
“I caught him for a moment in the lobby on his way out,” Julian

said sadly.

“Sammy, you’ve got to listen to me! How could you do this to me,
Sammy? Telling me they didn’t like my scenes when they used  …”

Sammy looked around the lobby coldly, saw the little group nearby

surrounding Sidney Fineman.

“I don’t want to discuss it here.”
“But Sammy, I can’t go on this way. Blanche  …”
“I said shut up.”
Then he looked up and added, “Thank you very much. I’m glad you

enjoyed it.”

Julian looked around. A gray-haired gentleman with a smiling pink

face was joining them. He slipped his arm around Sammy with fatherly
a ection.

“Looks like we have a hit, son,” he said. “And everybody’s talking

about the writing.”

“Thank you, Mr. Fineman. Julian, I don’t suppose I have to tell you

who this is—Sidney Fineman?”

“I’m very glad to meet you,” said Julian.
“How do you do,” said Fineman. Julian felt he was being cordial and

oblivious to him at the same time. “How did you like the picture?” It was

hardly a question the way Fineman put it, more like the perfunctory
How-are-you in passing an acquaintance on the street. And it demanded
the same kind of “Fine-thanks” answer.

There was a pause. Julian was hesitating. Wondering if Blanche was

watching him. Repeating to himself what he knew he ought to say.
Fineman was waiting. Sammy was staring at him like the bully in the
classroom whose eyes say “See you after school.”

“Very much,” Julian said.
“Fine,” said Fineman. “There are a couple of things I want to talk over

with you, Sammy. Will you excuse us?”

what to do until he spotted Sammy’s friend, Al Manheim, in the crowd.
Even then he might not have introduced himself if Blanche hadn’t insisted
that he go over and try to tell him the whole story.

“And God knows you have,” I said. “So what are all the  reworks

between you and the Missus?”

“That’s the part I haven’t told you,” he said. “The part that’s just

happened.”

“Oi vay!” I said.
“You see, Sammy was over to see me at half past eight this

morning.”

Now I remembered another morning that Sammy had been up at

the crack of dawn after an all-night party to keep an appointment
with Julian—leaving me behind in his apartment to dwell on my
biliousness and his sudden interest in Julian’s welfare.

“He was awfully friendly. He said he was still convinced our

destinies lay together and was willing to raise me to  fty a week to
convince me. He said he had just sold Mr. Collier a story called
Monsoon without having anything down on paper. But he had to
have something written by the time he saw him again, and he
thought we might knock it out together over the weekend. And, oh
yes, he told me that there are plenty of ghost writers in this town
who make more dough than lots of pretty well-known B writers.
Well, I wasn’t wild about the idea, but  fty bucks is  fty bucks, so

he made me promise I’d call at his o ce at three o’clock this
afternoon and give him my answer. Then I told Blanche. She went
nuts. I told her with  fty bucks a week we could rent that cottage on
Orange Grove we wanted. But you should have heard her.”

“To hell with the cottage! Maybe it would help pay the rent if I walked

the streets too. That’s what that great pal of yours wants you to do. Only
worse. I’m beginning to feel I’m living with a ghost. Look at you, you’re
even beginning to look like one, so pale, and losing weight and
stammering worse than ever. It’s this lousy job. You want to go through
more nights like last night? You think it’s worth  fty dollars a week to
vomit your supper in the toilet?”

“Next time I won’t get so upset,” Julian said. “Now I know how I

stand. I’m a ghost writer, and meanwhile  …”

“Meanwhile,” Blanche said in a voice that gave Julian the shivvers, “if

you let him shmeikle you into this, I’ll be in New York. I’ll catch the bus
tonight.”

The waiter came to take the plates away.
“You haven’t eaten anything,” I said.
“I’m not hungry,” he said. “I can’t eat.”
Then I realized that I had hardly eaten anything either.
“Will you help me,” he said, “Al?”
“I don’t know,” I said. “All I know is that I’m going to try.”
“I thought because he was a friend of yours,” he started to say.
“Here’s a nickel,” I said. “Get Blanche on the phone. Tell her she

was right. Tell her that whatever happens you two are sticking
together. And tell her that somebody who’s never met her but
knows her awfully well sends his love.”

Then I called Pancake, whom I hadn’t been able to clip from

behind in spite of Sammy’s coaching, and told him I would be
unavoidably detained from the studio this afternoon. I realized this
meant giving him a free-kick at my posterior, but if you can’t take
an hour o  to help a guy with something on the ball, you begin to

wonder just what the hell you think you’re working your ass o  for.
And other questions equally searching.

The receptionist’s pencil poised over the pad of studio passes. “Mr.
Glick. Who shall I say is calling?”

Since Sammy was waiting for Julian the chances are he’d only

brush me o . I didn’t like to do it, but I had to  gure what Sammy
would have done if he were in my spot.

“Mr. Blumberg,” I said.
I walked down the corridor to his door, slowing up as I reached it

because I was scared. Here I was going out of my way to do
something I hated more than anything else in the world. Avoiding
controversies has always been an obsession with me. The only times
I could digest were when I was liking everybody around me. Will
you please tell me why you had to get yourself into this? I thought. Who
the hell do you think you are, Sammy Glick’s conscience? I wasn’t so far
o  at that. As I stood there turning the knob I knew that my best
excuse for knowing Sammy Glick was as a kind of self-appointed
 rst-aid station, trying to revive the victims he left behind him as he
kept hitting-and-running his way to the top.

When I walked in on him he gave me a hollow “Hello-Al,” looked

around for Julian, questioned me with his eyes, and caught on.

“Your collaborator isn’t coming,” I said. “He’s on his way over to

see his wife. To tell her she doesn’t have to leave him. Because
you’re going to promise that the next picture he writes he not only
gets paid for but gets his name on.”

Sammy had looked at me in a lot of interesting ways since that

 rst meeting, but I had never seen anything like this before. I have
never had a gangster pass death sentence on me with his eyes, but
now I know what it is to see not only friendship but even
recognition iris out of them, the pupils contracting and ossifying till
they looked as if they could be plucked out and  red through a
shotgun.

do, get your Eagle Badge too?”

The Sammy Glick I met when I  rst came to Hollywood was a

cream pu  compared to the one with whom I now found myself
caged. He was still in his early twenties but no sign of youth
remained. The little knives of ambition had already begun to cut
lines into his face and the way he hunched over his cigar somehow
suggested middle age.

before you’re thirty.”

away. His voice spat in my face. “Listen, you son of a rabbi. When I
want sermons I don’t have to listen to amateurs. I can buy tickets for
the big shots in the racket—like Wise or Magnin.”

nostalgia, the brotherhood of man, the camaraderie of the
newspaper game and even, as a last resort, the need of Jews to help
each other in self-defense.

“Don’t pull that Jewish crapola on me,” Sammy said. “What the

hell did the Jews ever do for me?—except maybe get my head
cracked open for me when I was a kid.”

What makes Sammy run? The childhood, Kit had said, look into

the childhood.

Sammy took his eyes from me only for a moment, but it brought

relief. He looked past me, almost thoughtfully, as thoughtful as a
man rushing through life like Sammy could ever be.

“Jews,” he said bitterly and absently.
“Jews,” he said, like a storm trooper.
That was all he said but I knew it was much more than that. I

knew he was speaking his hate and his fear and his rage of anything
that had or would ever stand in his way.

your own good,” he said. “Wanna know why you’re a  op out here?
Because you pay too goddam much attention to other people’s
business. When I was a kid I felt kind of gypped because I couldn’t
go to college and make the basketball team. I was a helluva

basketball player once. But when I look at you I think maybe it’s a
good thing I didn’t get my mind all cluttered up with crap at that. I
may not know a lot of cushy words, but, by Jesus, I know about life.
Take Darwin, for instance. I didn’t have to read any books to know
all about the survival of the  ttest.”

seem to connect. I knew I was making a mess of it, that all I was
doing was convincing him that I was a lunatic. And not even a
dangerous one. I think he actually felt that he was going out of his
way to be kind to me. And I suppose he was, according to his lights,
those crazy blinding lights of his.

“What do you mean  ttest?” I said. “Who’s more  t to write

screenplays, you or Julian?”

His hand tightened around his cigar the way his voice did around

his words.

“Listen, pal, you’ll be doing yourself a big favor if you get out of

here. Because I’m liable to be in a position to do you some good one
of these days. And when I am I don’t want to have to remember
what a jerk you’re making outa yourself.”

“I don’t leave this o ce until Julian’s taken care of,” I said.
The statement was not as heroic as it sounded because it wasn’t

given quite enough voice. It wasn’t fear that sti ed me, but a
terrible sense of inadequacy.

That was something Sammy never had to worry about. His whole

body was behind his voice. Even when everyone else was silent he
used his voice as if he were yelling down a crowd.

“You can tell Julian for me,” he said, “that if he don’t like the  fty

bucks he can crap in his hat, pull it over his head and call it curls.”

That phrase has its ghost writer too, I thought, for it was a folk

cry of the New York gutters I had heard before. But Sammy spoke it
with a terrifying eloquence.

I said all the four-,  ve- and seven-letter words I could think of,

most of them outside in the corridor, after the door had slammed
behind me. I stood there trying to begin thinking what to do next. I
don’t know whether I thought  rst of Kit and then saw her name on
the opposite door or vice versa. Like most inspirations, the impulse

probably followed the stimulus so rapidly that it seemed to be
snatched from the sky. I don’t know why I hadn’t thought of her
before. She knew how to be just as tough as Sammy in her own way.
I had to admit that the characteristics that had made me hesitate
about her were the ones that might do Julian the most good.

word for her to admit no one this afternoon, not even to put calls
through.

for the secretary asked, “Is it a matter of life or death?”

“Both,” I said.
This seemed to bewilder her su ciently to stir her to action. A

moment later the door to the inner o ce swung open and Kit
appeared, dressed in tailored slacks, with a pencil stuck in her hair
and no makeup.

start a salon around here is leave your door open.”

smoke and an atmosphere of being worked in. At the desk, which
was littered with typewritten notes, sat a stenographer still writing
in her shorthand pad.

that last scene, Ellen,” Kit told the stenog. “Be ready for you again
in  fteen minutes.”

She led me to the couch and told me to sit down.
“Don’t mind my standing up,” she said. “I’ve been pacing up and

down this o ce so much all day I can’t stop. I feel like Charlie
Chaplin still going through the motions after he leaves that factory
in Modern Times.”

She demonstrated his nervous re ex-action gag.
I asked her what she was working on.
“On something really respectable for a change,” she said. “Young

Tom Je erson. You know Tom has always been my secret passion.
I’ve been after them to make a Je erson picture since the day I
checked in here—but they were always afraid of it for the British
market. Then I had the brainstorm of getting an English star like

Howard to play the part. So it looks as if it’s going through—if I can
only hammer out the goddam story line.”

She glanced at her watch, and her tone changed.
“But this isn’t what you came in to talk about,” she said, “so I

better give you the  oor. Because I really will have to run you out of
here in  fteen minutes.”

would shock her, but her only comment when I  nished was, “I’ve
been wondering who was doing Sammy’s stu . That Blumberg kid
looks sad enough to be a real humorist.”

“I’ve just been in talking to Sammy,” I said. “No dice.”
“I’m afraid you’re too nice a guy to do much good in this world,”

she said. “It takes a cold bitch like me to get anywhere with him.”

“Oh, I wouldn’t say that,” I said.
“I know you wouldn’t,” she said, “you’d only think it.”
She perched on the couch beside me for a moment.
“You’re not the iceberg you’d like to have us think you are,” I

said.

She smiled at me as if she was going to laugh and then

remembered she didn’t have time. “How much time have I got to
make an honest man of Mr. Blumberg?”

“Blanche is about to give him up as a lost cause any moment,” I

said. “Could you get to Sammy this afternoon?”

“Sorry,” she said. “I make it a rule never to let anything cut into

my work. I don’t even take calls from the Guild o ce. The only way
to get ahead in this business is to do one thing at a time.”

“Sounds a little like Sammy,” I said.
“A little bit of Glick would be a good thing in all of us,” she said.

She caught my look, and smiled. “I know, a very little bit.”

your number?”

“That’s not time enough,” she said. “You’ve given me a tough

assignment. Tell Blanche to cool o  and hang on. I’ll give you a ring
when it’s under control.”

She 
saw 
me 
to 
the 
door 
without 
any 
last-moment

embarrassments, told Ellen she was ready for her and shook hands

with me again.

“So long, Al,” she said. “Sorry I have to rush you o  this way.

Don’t let Julian’s worries throw you.”

When I looked back her door was closed and her swift, low-

pitched voice was already beginning to dictate again.

returned to the wars with Pancake.

Kit didn’t call me for ten days. But when she  nally did she said:
“Tell that bashful genius of yours to be at the studio at nine in the

morning, ready to take o  his coat, hang his inhibitions behind the
door and go to work.”

“What did you have to do, promise to marry him?”
“You know better than that,” she said. “Sammy is only infatuated

with me and respects me. Marriage is one of the trump cards he has
to hold until the pot is big enough.”

money? And doesn’t do his writing as if in training for the German
underground?”

“One hundred dollars a week,” she said. “No contract, just week

to week, but that doesn’t matter as long as he’s teamed with Sammy.
Sammy’s option was lifted for another year and I have a hunch he
won’t let Julian stray very far from him.”

is getting three or four times that much.”

“If the ratio of talent to bombast is only one to four,” she said,

“talent is coming up in the world.”

miracles. Like having a credit line read—by Sammy Glick and Julian
Blumberg. How the hell did you swing it?”

“The Guild’s supposed to protect writers from unfair practices,”

she said. “Not only from employers—but from other writers.”

sucker for sentiment?”

“From the moment I promised him Julian would get up and tell

all at the next membership meeting. One of the planks in our Code

is to stamp out ghost writing. Ghosting is the writers’ Fate Worse
Than Death.”

power. So what good will your public confessional do?”

“Hollywood consists of half a dozen studios and half a dozen

restaurants,” she said. “And as you probably know, writers are
talkative fellows. And when six hundred writers start saying the
same thing …”

“I see,” I said.
“So did Sammy,” she said.
I said it seemed odd for her to put the screws on Sammy that way

after the compassion she was expressing for him just the week
before.

“That’s like saying because we know the cause of a disease and

feel sorry for its victim, we shouldn’t quarantine him,” she said.

the one who did him some good.

“Okay,” I said, “I’ll cry uncle.”
“Not until you join the Guild,” she said. “After all, you’ve had a

practical demonstration in your own home.”

“I haven’t got anything against the Guild,” I said. “But, oh, hell, I

guess I’m an individualist.”

Grand Street Boys to the Liberty League.”

because they aren’t employees.”

“He didn’t happen to say what they were?” she said.
“Artists,” I said.
“Tell that to the producers,” she laughed.
“When am I going to see you?” I said.
“I’ll give you a ring before the next Guild meeting,” she said.

“Maybe we can all go together.”

“Jesus,” I said, “I seem to meet nothing but B-girls out here.”
She laughed. “I guess we’re all B-girls for something.”
“Well, thanks a helluva lot for going to bat for the kid,” I said. “It

was damn nice of you.”

me feel a little foolish and a little peeved. “The Guild is always at
your service. See you, Al.”

news.

“Hello, Julian?” I said.
“Hello, sweetheart—come on over and drink to the future of a

writing team that’s going to make Hecht and MacArthur look like a
couple of o ce boys.”

“What the hell are you doing there?”
“I just came over to tell Julie I’ve decided to give him a break,”

Sammy said. “From now on he’s going to be my collaborator. You
ought to see him, he’s tickled to death.”

“You better get a grip on yourself,” I said. “One of these days that

generosity is just going to run away with you.”

blowing them to a spread at La Maze), I walked over to Barney’s
Beanery, listened to a once-famous vaudeville team who were
singing once-famous songs for tips and tried to drown my reaction
to Sammy’s most recent philanthropy in Barney’s onion soup.

OceanofPDF.com

Sammy had little chance of disturbing my dreams those next few
months, for the studio was having one of its periodic drives to cut
overhead—which seemed to mean shaving stenographers’ wages
 rst and gradually working their way up to  ring small-fry writers
like me—so I had been working like a bastard trying to hang on.
The Megaphone had labeled my  rst e ort Fair Meller, and even
though I had refused to take an ad, that seemed to be giving it the
bene t of the doubt. The situation was so tense that I got the jitters
every time an inter-o ce memo arrived, for fear of being informed
that I was no longer employed.

Kit would call me two or three times a month, but that was

nothing to gloat over, since all it was ever about was her goddam
Guild. I was still carrying the membership card around in my pocket
unsigned. I got a rise out of her when I told her that I liked a lot of
people, but I liked them one at a time, not all bunched together.

I  nally went, of course. For almost  ve hours I sat with three or

four hundred others in a badly ventilated gymnasium listening to
speeches without even the consolation of sitting with Kit because
she had to be up on the platform. I felt that if the Guild had a place
in Hollywood it had yet to discover what it was. The low-paid
writers wanted the Guild to be a real bread-and-butter union, and
the congenial  ve-hundred-dollar-a-week guys thought what writers
needed most was a communal hangout like the old Writers’ Club
where they could sit around and get to know each other. The
twenty- ve-hundred-dollar-a-week writers with famous names
seemed to be most interested in increasing their in uence in picture
productions and spoke  ne, brave abstract words about the scope of
the medium and dignifying the position of the screen writer. The

meeting seemed a little too much like a caterpillar separated into
several parts groping blindly for each other.

When Kit called again about six weeks later I said, “Don’t tell me,

let me guess; another meeting?”

She said, “The Guild situation is getting hot. Some of the boys are

beginning to criticize it because it’s too much like a union—and
some because it’s not enough.”

I told her I didn’t feel like a meeting tonight and she said to meet

her at Musso’s on the Boulevard at seven, so we could get there
around eight-thirty. Kit had left word for Sammy to meet us for
dinner, but as we were sitting down the headwaiter gave us the
message that he was tied up with Franklin Collier in a Monsoon
conference.

“How’s he getting along?” I said.
“There hasn’t been anything like it since the rise of Irving

Thalberg,” she said. “But he’s been very unhappy.”

“You’re breaking my heart,” I said.
“He and Julian could go on being a successful team for a long

time,” she said. “I suppose if he saved his dough he could retire
before he was thirty. But that isn’t enough for him. He can’t stop
there. Being bracketed with Julian is driving him crazy.”

“Where’s it going to end, Kit?”
“That’s his cross,” she said. “Always thinking satisfaction is just

around the bend. Not so di erent from the whippet with his
mechanical rabbit.”

“That’s good,” I said. “I want to remember that.”
“A whippet,” she said. “That’s what he’s always reminded me of,

from that  rst moment he came in to put the bee on me for
Merriam.”

—only a ferret.”

reaction?” she said lightly.

“You think more like a man than any woman I’ve ever known—

and most men.”

time a man discovers that a woman thinks, the only way he can
explain it is that she happens to have a male mind. You just don’t
know me, Al. I’m feminine as all hell.”

“It looks as if the only way I’ll ever know you,” I said, “is for the

Guild to hold meetings every night.”

“That reminds me,” she said. “We ought to be on our way.”
I tried to grab the check but she was too fast for me. I told her I

didn’t like the idea of having a woman take me to dinner, but my
defense of the old-fashioned ways only seemed to amuse her.

“Why should you pay it?” she said. “I asked you, didn’t I?”

The meeting had a tenseness, which could be felt in the hall like air
pressure, as the president began to speak of the Guild’s need for
allies in its  ght for recognition and the logical step of joining the
Authors’ League of America.

Until that moment the Guilders had kidded themselves into

thinking that they were one big happy family. But the president had
hardly  nished when angry gentlemen were screaming to be heard.
Their anger seemed almost inexplicable to me. You would have
thought that the president had recommended joining the
Communist International, instead of the conservative Authors’
League. We must remain a purely Hollywood organization, they
yelled. We must not fall under the domination of outside forces. We
don’t want to slip into the clutches of Eastern racketeers and Reds.

One of the loudest attacks on the Authors’ League plan was made

by a man with a paunchy body and a paunchy face. I recognized
Harold Godfrey Wilson, whom Sammy had pointed out to me that
 rst day at the Vendome. As far as I could remember, all that the
president had suggested was that the Guild look into the question of
what kind of assistance it could obtain from the Authors’ League.
But for some reason, that made Mr.

Wilson apoplectic. He began by telling the story of his life, now

he had come to Hollywood in the early twenties, working as an

extra, then as a gag man, gradually  ghting his way up to become
one of the most important writers in the industry, and now, by God,
no bunch of Broadway snobs, who thought they were too good for
Hollywood, was going to sit around the Algonquin and tell him
what to do.

was just about the time Sammy came in. He was wearing a wrap-
around camel’s-hair coat with a yellow scarf. He stood there in the
doorway a moment and then he picked me out on the aisle and took
the seat I had been saving for him.

stuck his feet up on it. I couldn’t help noticing the shoes. They were
new again. A style I had never seen before, without any laces at all.

You can’t buy them out here, but if you give them your
measurements they’ll send them to you from New York. I’ve got a
standing order for a couple of pair a year.”

I just pointed toward Kit on the platform. “As long as the Guild is

a democratic organization,” she was saying, “there aren’t any
di erences we can’t take in our stride. And we can go on being a
democratic organization just as long as we all stick together; don’t
let anybody scare us and hammer out our program right here on the
 oor.”

She seemed to have caught the mood of the membership because

her plea for unity got the best hand of the night.

“Looks like Kit is our Joan of Arc,” I said.
Sammy looked around at his fellow members with very little love.

“Sure,” he said, “she knows how to get to them, all right. But they’re
nothing but a bunch of sheep. Throw one good scare into them and
they’ll run out of this place so fast you’ll think it’s on  re.”

“With a pair of Cromwell shoes in the lead,” I said.
Up till that moment, though I had to admire what Kit was trying

to do, and though I thought unions were a good thing in general, I
didn’t see much need or much chance for a screen writers’
organization. But now I was defending it. I suppose if Sammy had

expressed a preference for Heaven, I would have launched into a
defense of Hell.

The day I was laid o  at the studio I felt so low I decided I had to
see Kit. Whoever answered her phone told me I could reach her at
Mr. Glick’s, and when Sammy’s Jap informed me that the master
had gone to Palm Springs for the weekend I felt still lower. I called
Billie.

I had never seen the old part of Los Angeles so we went down to

Olivera Street, the narrow market with its tourist stalls which is all
that remains of the early Spanish town, where marimba bands play
their gay and melancholy tunes in front of sidewalk cafes, tamales
are sold like hot dogs and you get the impression that every
Mexican in the world is trying to sell you a souvenir.

It was a little too much like a set on the back lot to make me very

happy at  rst, but a couple of slugs of tequila made a di erence.
Billie, who seemed to be in love with all men nicely, began to teach
me the rhumba, and she used her few words of Spanish on the
waiter and after burning my stomach with enchilada and my brain
with more tequila I was holding her large plump hand and saying,
“Billie, hey Billie, listen Billie, d’ya love me?”

“Sure, honey,” she giggled. “You’re cute when you’re drunk.”
“I’m not drunk, Billie,” I said. “I know every word I’m saying. If

you don’t believe me I can tell you everything we’ve said since we
sat down. Okay. So I’m not drunk. I’m just serious, that’s all. I’m in
love with you, Billie, seriously, and if you don’t believe me I’ll call
you tomorrow and say the same thing when I’m sober.”

“Don’t be serious, honey,” she said. “Love is much nicer when it

isn’t serious.”

“But goddam it, I love you,” I said loudly. “I want to marry you.”
As I reached my hand out to hold hers and make it more

convincing, I turned over my half- lled glass.

“Look at that,” I laughed as the thick liquid rolled slowly across

the table. “Looks just like lava. No wonder I feel hot. I’m drinking

lava.”

“You’re in love, Al,” she said. “You’re in love with somebody, all

right.”

love with somebody?”

good and wants to marry me, I know he’s in love with somebody.”

She may never write a book about it, but speaking strictly
physically, spiritually, romantically and psychologically she must
know more about love than Havelock Ellis and Bertrand Russell put
together.

“I’m not in love with anybody,” I said. “But if I were in love with

anybody it would be with you, sweetheart. Because, well, hell,
you’re old-fashioned. You may not know it, baby, but you’re the
nineteen-thirty-six version of the old-fashioned girl—the nineteen-
thirty-sex version,” I added and broke myself up.

“Mmmm a tango,” she said with her whole body behind it.
“I think I’ll just sit this one out,” I said. “Go ahead, Billie, I’d only

be in your way. Just let me sit here and watch.”

you’d better pay the check. They’re closing up.”

“My God,” I said, “Billie, you scared me. Jesus, I’ve been sleeping.

I must have been sleeping for hours!”

starting to close your eyes.”

“But I’ve been dreaming,” I said. “Know who it was about?

Sammy Glick. He was climbing up a rope and I was chasing him,
only the rope didn’t seem to be tied to anything—just going straight
up in the air. And every time he got near the end, it just kept getting
longer. And then I fell o  …”

get-home voice.

While I was waiting for the change I said, “Billie, I don’t think I

ever asked you before. Do you know what makes Sammy run?”

She looked at me puzzled, not knowing whether to take it

seriously or humor me.

“That’s all right,” I said, “take your time. I’ve been at it for years.”
“Do you know?” she said.
“Of course I don’t know,” I said. “But I’m working on it, little by

little. You know what I need, Billie? A subsidy from the Carnegie
Foundation. Then I could have a whole sta  helping me. Because it’s
a big job, Billie. Once we know what makes Sammy run it will be a
great thing for the world. Like discovering the cause of cancer.”

“We better go home,” Billie said.
“Billie,” I said, “can you keep a secret? I think Kit is the only

person in the world who knows what makes Sammy run. And she’s
such a coldhearted bitch she won’t tell.”

When Kit called me for the next meeting I was either not myself or
too much myself. I said, “I should think you could get a girl at the
Guild o ce to take over some of this secretarial work for you, Kit.”

“What is it, Al?” she said. “You sound sore at me.”
I’m not sore, I thought. I think I’m falling in love with you. There

is a very subtle di erence.

“I guess I’m just in sort of a mood today,” I said. “I think maybe

I’ll pass this one up, Kit, if it’s all the same with you.”

As usual I browsed around Stanley Rose’s until I had an appetite

and then as usual I went next door to Musso’s.

“Evening, Mr. Manheim,” the waiter greeted me. “Going to the

Guild meeting tonight?”

Amelio was a good union man himself who would  nd no inner

peace until Hollywood was an organized town. I said I was, in order
to avoid indigestion over my chicken wings, for Amelio was the
restaurant’s indisputable forensic star.

On my way out I got it again. I stopped to say hello to three

writers who always ate at the same table by the door. “Want to have
a drink with us?” they asked. “And then we’ll all go over to the
meeting together.”

I told them I would probably see them over there.
I started walking down the Boulevard and turned in at the narrow

alleyway leading to Henkel’s Art Gallery. The gallery was in a funny
little bungalow with an easygoing, out-of-this-world atmosphere,
which featured surrealist and abstractionist stu  and Mr. Henkel,
blond, middle-aged, dumpy and vague, who spoke about art with a
cigarette in his mouth so rapidly and indistinctly that I was rarely
able to understand him, though occasional phrases always sounded
signi cant.

beginning to meet people everywhere I went. This time it was my
erstwhile collaborator, Pancake.

“Well,” he said, “it seems there are some writers left who are still

more interested in the better things than in forming a union like a
bunch of plumbers.”

matter of fact,” I said, “I just came in here to kill a couple of
minutes before going over with the rest of the plumbers.”

I must have arrived only half an hour late because the meeting

hadn’t begun yet. People were still standing around in little groups,
talking. I picked Sammy out right away. He must have swallowed a
magnet when he was a little boy. I started over. He was with Harold
Godfrey Wilson and a tall, lean fellow who would have had the face
of a typical Yale man if it hadn’t been for the pale, sick skin and the
tired patches under the eyes.

Sammy proudly introduced me to Lawrence Paine, whose name

had been on some of the  nest pictures Hollywood had turned out. I
remembered that he had won the Academy Award for the best
screenplay a year or so ago.

Paine said. “But I’ll be damned if I like how it’s being run. They’re
letting too many people in. What the hell, every lucky bastard who
happens to sell one story isn’t a screen writer. The producers won’t
take us seriously until we limit the membership to writers who’ve
been employed at least a year, or get a thousand dollars a week.”

Hollywood Boulevard in their May Day Parade,” Wilson said.

“What do you mean, Reds?” I said.
“Well, maybe not Reds,” Paine said. “Harold here always gets a

little excited. But they’re goddam parlor-pinks and that’s just as bad.
It’s up to the responsible element to save the Guild.”

“Excuse me, Mr. Paine,” I said. “I just joined the Guild on my way

in tonight and I admit I don’t know too much about it. But it seems
to me you want to save the Guild by kicking out the little guys like
me. And they’re just the ones the Guild ought to be helping the
most.”

“Apparently not all the lower-bracket writers feel the way you do

about it. Young Sammy here is with us, aren’t you, Sammy?”

Young Sammy was with them, all right. Young Sammy was

applying for the job of bugle boy in the proud little army that
marched under the banner of $2500 a week.

After they wandered o  Sammy shook his head and said, “Al,

you’ll never get anywhere that way. Those guys have an in with
some of the biggest producers in town. They know what they’re
talking about. They don’t get twenty- ve hundred a week for
nothing.”

“You will,” I said.
“Twenty- ve hundred a week,” he said.
I could feel him going crazy inside when he said it.
“What are you making now, Sammy?” I asked.
“A lousy  ve hundred,” he said. “But it isn’t the dough. Hell, as

long as I stay single I can manage on  ve hundred all right. But the
producers use  ve-hundred-a-week writers to wipe themselves with,
Al.”

clubfoot, or a tapeworm in his mind.

you crazy son-of-a-bitch. I’ll bet you get it before you’re thirty.”

“You know you can get good credits out here for years without

getting in the big dough,” Sammy said. “But I’ve been thinking
about it. I’ve been looking over guys’ shoulders while they hit the

jackpot. Know how they do it? On the outside. With a hit play, for
instance. That’s how these producers think. They see something they
like in print or on the stage and right away their tongues are
hanging out to pay the writer three or four times as much as the
guys trying to make a rep in their own business.”

“What makes you think you can write a play?” I said.
“Hell, plenty of dopes write plays,” he said.
“Talented dopes,” I said.
“Talent can get you just so far,” he said. “Then you got to start

using your head.”

The meeting was being called to order. There seemed to be a

larger crowd than last time. It looked as if the Guild was on its way.

“What have you been doing for yourself?” Sammy said.
I didn’t give him the usual optimistic crap because I wanted to

hear what he would say. I told him after my option had lapsed I had
gone without a job for a couple of months and  nally had landed at
National, a little action-picture lot, on a  at-deal basis at a thousand
bucks a script. Which means that you work twenty-six hours a day
trying to get your dough as fast as possible.

“Any time limit on rewriting?” Sammy said.
I couldn’t remember any.
“Then they’ve got you by the balls but good,” Sammy said. “Once

you get your grand they can keep you on the picture as long as they
like.”

for the Guild.”

“If you ask me,” Sammy said, “the Guild has one foot in the grave

—and it’s goosing itself with the other. Maybe you ought to write a
play too.”

for three years. It was about a rabbi like my father and anti-
Semitism in a small town and the fundamental quest of simple men
for dignity, fraternity, peace and beer on Saturday night. I wanted
to make the content of the play everything that I had seen and felt,
and the form everything I knew. And I didn’t want to tell anybody
about it until it began to come alive to me. Because it seems to me

too many writers drain their excitement and energy away in
conversation.

“I’ve been working on one for a couple of years,” I said.
“Don’t futz around with it too long,” Sammy said. “Try to peddle

it. They buy lousy plays for pictures every day. And six months from
now the chances are that they won’t remember what kind of dreck it
was. All they’ll remember is that you are a playwright and look at
all the lousy playwrights out here in the big money.”

I don’t know whether Sammy had the play already written the night
we talked about it or whether he ran right home and dashed it o 
after that meeting, but it couldn’t have been more than a couple of
months later that I received an engraved invitation in the mail. Mr.
Samuel Glick was requesting the pleasure of my company at the
opening of his three-act comedy-drama Live Wire at the Hollywood
Playhouse.

Sammy Glick, prominent scenarist and playwright, I thought

tenderly and hatefully, my little Sammy Glick.

I was still admiring the tasteful typography of his announcement

when Sammy called.

His voice was full of exulting raucous chimes out of tune.
“Hiya sweetheart, how’re they hanging? Well, are you all set for

your greatest evening in the American theater?”

I said I had his invitation.
“It’s shaping up something terri c,” he said. “Everybody says it

looks like the biggest opening this town ever had. I gave Fineman
and Frank Collier a row each and they even promised to join my
party at the Troc after the show. I sent Irving Thalberg and Norma
Shearer a couple of ducats and they haven’t sent them back, so it
looks as if they’re in the bag too.”

“How do you get away with all those tickets?” I said. “What did

you do, buy out the house for the night?”

“To tell you the truth,” he said, “I got a little dough in the show

myself. I talked my agents into backing it with me  fty- fty. I hadda

brainstorm, see? I told them the best goddam way in the world to
hit the producers for six  gures was to put the show on right under
their noses with a helluva fanfare. My agents can smell big dough a
mile away. They went right out and grabbed a  rst-class Broadway
producer to front for us.”

mistake so far I haven’t noticed it. So why in hell do you want to go
telling me all this for?”

“In the  rst place,” he said, “you’re a good guy.”
He said it with absolute derision. “I never held it against you for

putting the clip on me for Rosalie or Julian. If that’s your pleasure,
go ahead. I just  gure your brain’s a little soft, that’s all, but it’s
okay by me. I still like you. You’re good for me. If I tell you
something in con dence you don’t shoot your mouth o  to the  rst
big shot you meet to try to get an in.”

But he had more important people to hate.

“And in the second place, what the hell if they do  nd out? I’d

just tell ’em it shows how much con dence I got in my own work.”

“And in the third place you’re so goddam pleased with yourself

you have to tell somebody and I’m the best listener you’ve got,” I
added.

He chuckled. “I love you, you fresh bastard,” he said.
“By the way,” I said, “what kind of a play did you dig up for the

occasion?”

“A million laughs,” he said. “I knocked it out in exactly four

weeks and everybody who’s seen it says it’s sensational. There’s so
much excitement about it that my press agent Stan Dickey says he’s
having an easier job getting space for it than for Once in a Lifetime.”

I said.

knows his way around. People are suckers for the printed word, Al,
and that even goes for the top guys. They believe what they read,
even when they’re on their guard. If they read it often enough. I’ve
had Dickey plugging me ever since I took Julie into the studio with

me. I made a smart deal with Dickey. I told him he could keep
working for me as long as he gets my name in there at least three
times a week.”

Sometimes it made me sore when Sammy talked that way,

sometimes it just made me wonder how the hell homosaps got that
way, sometimes it left me sick to think what a tremendous burning
and blinding light ambition can be where there is something behind
it, and what a puny  ickering sparkler when there isn’t. Sammy’s
 ame was deceptive because you were always looking at it through
the powerful magnifying glass of his own ego. But when the
telephone wires failed to transmit the magnetic current it was like
standing o  and looking at a small, cold star. This time, listening
half to what Sammy was saying now, half to everything he had ever
said to me before, I thought of Sammy, distinguished and dead at
 fty, a front-page story which Stan Dickey had written and Sammy
previously okayed, with governors and bankers and people in high
places as honorary pallbearers and everyone mourning the loss of a
captain of industry, an Elk, a self-made man and a Great American.

“Al,” he said. “Here’s the reason I called you. Do you wanna be a

really good guy?”

“What do you want me to do?” I said.
“Take Kit o  my hands tonight.”
“Sure,” I said, “I guess that’s okay with me. But what’s the story?”
“I’m taking Rita Royce,” he said.
He said it in the same tone of voice as the  rst time he ordered St.

James Scotch. Rita Royce was one of the better known of the new
crop of aphrodisiacs, a sort of streamlined Theda Bara.

Kit pushed open the door of her Ford convertible. She was wearing a
short fur jacket over a white evening gown that emphasized her tan.
She had her hair a di erent way, up on her head in a smooth roll,
and it was almost a shock to see how feminine she could look when
she wanted to.

She said, “Hi.”

“What’s with you and Sammy tonight?”
She answered me by imitating a hypothetical gossip in the

audience. “Doesn’t Rita Royce look simply divine? Isn’t the young
man with her Sammy Glick, the one who’s supposed to be so
brilliant?”

way it really was, amusing and just a little pathetic.

“I’m surprised he didn’t pair you with Gary Cooper,” I said. “It

would have been good publicity.”

“He did want to palm me o  on some glamour-boy who’s

supposed to be on his way up at Metro,” she said. “But I’m afraid
I’m something of a chauvinist about actors. Even intelligent ones. In
fact, sometimes they’re worse because they know more words to use
about themselves. So I held out for you.”

not have been on hand for the unveiling of another milestone in my
best friend’s career.”

telephone poles through the window of a train.”

I have never shown the slightest inclination to sketch, but when
Sammy came strutting toward us in a new full-dress suit, his chest
pu ng out his sti  white shirt like a pouter pigeon, with his hair
slicked, a blood-red carnation in his lapel and a look on his face as if
he had just swallowed his producer, I wished for one moment my
fairy godmother would turn me into Toulouse-Lautrec. Even the
customary patent-leather evening shoes weren’t good enough for
him tonight. He had discovered dancing pumps, those dainty, ultra-
evening slippers with the pointed toes and the little black bows.

trying to use manners to match his dress clothes. Funny to see him
trying to form sentences without his four-letter words, leaving his
conversation ridiculously stilted. And poor Rita, who seemed as if
she might be a good kid under all those layers of glamour. If only
she didn’t have to try so hard to live up to that amazing body of
hers.

she was going to have in the picture and she had to make it
remembered. “To our young genius—success.”

I caught Kit’s eye as we drank and we smiled at each other

guiltily. As Rita drank she fell back on that hackneyed bit of
business of smiling up over the rim of her glass with her eyes
 uttering. You could feel sorry for Rita and like her, or embarrassed
for her and dislike her, depending on your disposition at the
moment.

Sammy acknowledged her toast with one of his own. “We can’t

drink to your success, because that’s already established. So we’ll
drink to its continuance.”

teaching the young genius and littérateur not to say ain’t.

couldn’t help noticing his clippings. There were items about Sammy
from papers all over the country, mailed to him by a clipping
service. When Sammy caught me looking at them he came over and
shoved a paper under my nose.

“See this?” he said coyly.
It was the Hollywood Megaphone. I began to read the lead editorial

in the corner. The editor was taking potshots at the Writers Guild
again. “What makes these wild-eyed members of the Screen Writers
Guild think they can get away with biting the hand that feeds
them?” it asked. “We are not against the Guild. We are for this
industry. If the Guild were for this industry too, instead of trying to
ruin it by joining up with the Eastern playwrights who hate
Hollywood and always have, we would be for the Guild too.”

“What is all this fuss about the Authors’ League?” I said. “What

possible good would it do the Guild to ruin the industry?”

the page—with the red circle around it.”

It was half a dozen lines headed: GLICK THUMBS DOWN $75,000.

Sammy Glick, local boy-wonder scribe, puts thumbs down on major
studio o er of 75 G’s for his play Live Wire, it was understood last

night. Prefers to hold picture deals o  until curtain goes up for  rst time
at Playhouse Fri. Night.

I always love those journalistic outs—it was alleged, it was

learned in semi-o cial circles, it was understood. “Who was it
understood by,” I said, “except you and Stan Dickey?”

Sammy slapped me on the back, playfully but jolting me, and his

laugh was a little too loud for the evening-clothes atmosphere.

“One of these days remind me to rub you out,” he gagged. “You

know too much.”

We drove to the theater in a sleek black Lincoln Sammy had hired

for the occasion. As we got out, there was a little  urry of
excitement around Rita, started by a plump young lady in slacks and
a gangling, scabby-kneed girl who shoved their autograph books in
her face while Sammy stood looking on, drinking it in. One frantic
little fan, taking no chances, even wanted Kit’s autograph. “You
don’t want my autograph,” Kit told her.

The child insisted that she did. Kit looked at me helplessly, took

the pencil and scribbled her name. The child stared at the page,
puzzled a moment, cried out feverishly, “That was nobody!” ripped
the page out, crumpled and threw it away and fought her way into
the middle of the next circle.

As we took our seats photographers were prowling up and down

the aisles hunting celebrities. Sammy and Rita were trying very hard
to seem interested in what each had to say and watch the
cameramen out of the corners of their eyes at the same time. When
the  ashlight boys  nally sighted them Rita tilted her head with just
the right come-on smile without seeming to realize she was being
photographed at all. But Sammy took it big. He looked at that
camera like a lover. The man who took that picture may have been
just another publicity hack but that picture of his was worth saving
as a real photographic study. In fact I clipped it out of next
morning’s paper for that collection of Sammyglickiana I am going to
turn over to the Smithsonian when the species  nally runs itself into
extinction. The most striking thing about that photograph is that it

isn’t so much a picture of two people sitting together as two
individual portraits that merely happen to be side by side. Rita is
staring o  at an imaginary leading man with a wistful gleam in her
eyes. And Sammy is looking right at you, sneering joyfully. The
head is cocked slightly at an angle, like an alert Boston bull. The
eyes gloat. The sneer comes only from the mouth, which veers ever
so slightly o  center.

Spotlight with Samuel Glick As Young Playwright’s Comedy Live
Wire Wins Acclaim at Last Night’s Opening. With Them Is a Friend.

from the camera watching Sammy Glick, is myself.

The play was what Sammy needed, all right. It was one of those

things about two red-blooded guys who are always scrapping and
loving each other, in this case a couple of announcers in a radio
station getting each other in and out of jams with enough gags and
surprises and general hell-raising to keep the audience su ciently
amused. I was thinking how much the play was like its author,
nothing really there to o er, but slugging the onlookers into
submission with sheer noise and velocity, and back of all this I kept
thinking something tells me this is awfully familiar and then the
show was over and someone in the house, probably Stan Dickey,
started to call Author, Author, and the cry was picked up and
Sammy was taking a bow and all of a sudden it’s a big success and
I’m sitting next to a hit playwright and everyone’s stepping over me
to shake his hand, and he’s modestly denying that he must have
worked very hard on it, saying it just seemed to come to him,  ve or
six nights’ work and everyone’s amazed and pleased and someone,
not Stan Dickey any more, for by now it’s spontaneous, says a new
genius has come to Hollywood and Sammy says, “Oh, I wouldn’t say
that exactly.”

We waited in the car while Sammy went backstage to

congratulate and get congratulated by the cast, and when he
returned he was not the same as when he left us a few minutes
before. I’ll be damned if even his voice hadn’t changed. It seemed
lower and more digni ed. He wasn’t just one more of those bright

 ve-hundred-dollar-a-week boys any more. No more worries about
being classed with Julian. He was ready for big time. No more
trying to wangle invitations to Harry Godfrey Wilson’s clambakes.
He was already thinking of asking Wilson and Paine and McCarter
and the rest of the upper crust over for a little stud poker himself
soon.

new social position. In fact we headed straight for the Trocadero,
where Sammy was throwing a celebration party for himself. He
seemed almost more elated about bagging the Finemans and the
Colliers for it than he did about his play. I guess it was just as
important at that.

to wait. Sammy ordered champagne cocktails and then Rita said,
“Excuse me, I have to comb my hair,” and went out to the ladies’
room. She could say, “Pass the salt,” and make it sound exotic. “I’ll
chaperon you,” Kit said, as she rose and followed her out.

It was funny to watch Rita parading through the room like a

peacock and know she was only going to the can. Funnier to watch
Kit striding after her. It was a gait better suited to slacks than
evening gowns. But I actually preferred Kit’s  gure. Rita’s
voluptuousness looked as if it might turn into fat some day if she
didn’t watch herself. But Kit made you feel she was always going to
be this way, hard and slim.

between handsome and luscious,” he said.

I wouldn’t give him the satisfaction of letting him know I agreed

with him. I just sat there with my wine, feeling righteous and
jealous.

what you think.”

“I think it’s just like something else I’ve seen,” I said.
He started to say, “That’s so much horse—” and then he

remembered he was a prominent playwright. “After all no play can
ever be entirely original.”

“That’s true,” I said. “They can only be entirely unoriginal.”

know I didn’t happen to do any of the actual writing of that stu 
with Julie you got it  xed in your mind that I can’t write.”

and then all of a sudden it came to me.

“My God! The Front Page”!
Even then he wouldn’t give in until I had traced the parallel,

scene for scene.

Page. Only I changed the characters. And I jazzed it up a little
more.”

“Those people didn’t know what a genius you are,” I said.
He looked around furtively. “Listen, Al,” he said. “Before it didn’t

matter. I was only playing for marbles. But if you do any talking
about this I’ll killya—so help me Christ, I’ll run you out of this town
for good.”

Then he suddenly dropped his voice and smiled at me, but

 ercely.

anybody else. But if I ever get to be one of the head guys out here
you won’t  nd me forgetting my pals like some of these other
bastards.”

was too dumb to do you any harm. Why the hell should I tell
anybody what a bastard you are? Let them  nd out for themselves.”

He relaxed, even patted my hand reassuringly.
“Okay, pal,” he said. “I’d trust you like my own mother. It’s just a

funny thing about this racket—the bigger you are, the jumpier you
get. Only just remember, what I said about loyalty still goes.”

I’ll remember it all right, I thought. How could I ever forget a

combination as unique as loyalty and Sammy Glick?

Rita came back, gradually, stopping at three tables en route.
“Sammy,” she said, “when are you going to write a play for me?”
“When he can  nd one,” I said.
“I don’t want to write for you until I feel something great,”

Sammy said, “something that’s—you.”

She moved closer to him.
That’s the only real play you’ll ever get from him, I thought.
Kit rescued us by announcing the arrival of Sammy’s guests.
The Trocadero was the place to be seen that season, a chic,

handsomely tailored night club with creamy walls, subtle
illumination that retouched the women’s faces like fashionable
photographers. A startling south wall made entirely of glass looked
out and down at the houselights and the street lamps and the red
neon smears of Hollywood, Los Angeles, Beverly Hills, Culver City
and the rest of the sprawling communities in the long valley
between the Hollywood Hills on the north and the ridge dotted with
oil wells sloping up behind MGM,  fteen miles to the south.

Finemans and Colliers and his new sense of authority, being witty
and charming and intelligent. I think I even heard him expressing an
interest in rare books for Fineman. The chances were he had had his
secretary doing some research for him on the subject. A moment
later he was leaning toward Collier, discussing the technical
problems he must have faced in trying to photograph penguins in
their native environment. That was a new gift Sammy was
beginning to acquire. He was learning to abandon the direct
sledgehammer approach. It was still there, of course, but he was
learning how to camou age it. He was developing an amazing
ability to appropriate and broadcast ideas and cultural attitudes
which he never held long enough to absorb. I heard him discussing
a current best-seller with Mrs. Fineman, which I would have bet
anything she had read and he hadn’t, but that didn’t stop him from
doing most of the talking about it, employing a razzle-dazzle literary
double-talk technique that had good, simple Mrs. Fineman on the
run.

I was glad to  nd out Kit didn’t like these parties either.
“What always amazes me,” she said, “is that with all the turnover

in Hollywood from year to year, almost from month to month, the
faces in here never seem to change.”

I looked around the room to see whom I was with. Kit pointed out

to me the famous free-lance Hollywood photographer, Katz, a

feverish little dwarf of a man who would look undressed without his
Gra ex and whose degree of interest in you as a photographic
subject had become an accurate test of your rating in the industry.

“Last time I was here,” Kit said, “someone pointed out to Katz that

Major Adams was in the room—remember, one of the men who
practically founded Hollywood, I guess, worked with Gri th for
years and probably did more for pictures than any other producer
before Thalberg? They say he’s down-and-out now but some of his
old gang keep him going. Well, Katz barely looked up from his
reloading. ‘Who, Adams?’ he said. ‘He’s nobody. Anyway, I gotta
save my bulbs for the Tom Brown-Anita Louise party coming in
later.’ And he said it so loud that poor old Adams turned around.”

We watched the people together, being very catty of course about

the little ingénue with gold stars pasted on her bare shoulders. And
the beautiful young juvenile singing into her ear the words of the
popular song they were dancing to. And the look of aloof superiority
that came over the dancers’ faces for the rhumba,  ashing their
heads expertly from side to side, so conscious of the  gure they
were cutting on the  oor. And the ex-hatcheck girl on her way to
stardom with her magni cent (but dead) pan, swirling around the
 oor with a dashing and toothy screen villain whose face seemed to
be set in a permanent sneer. And the foolishly oblivious couple, he a
half-bald, red-faced grinner, fugitive from middle age; she a young,
plumpish and pretty blonde with a silly champagne smile and a gift
for abandon. And the almost-matronly woman who had taken
rhumba and tango and charm lessons and the fourteen-year-old who
should have been in bed instead of awkwardly trying to simulate the
rhythm of the rhumba. And …

“What do you think our chances are of taking a powder?” I said.
She took the table in and smiled. “He who hesitates,” she said, “is

trapped here in the Black Hole of Trocadero until morning.”

We rose together, conspiratorially.
“Don’t bother to say good night,” she said. “So we don’t break up

the party. Let’s just say we’re going out to get a little air.”

Outside it was good just to stand there a moment and let the wind

sweeping down the Strip from the sea blow the liquor fumes and the

smoke and the chatter of simultaneous voices out of your mind.

We hopped a taxi back to the Colonial House to pick up Kit’s

Ford.

be?”

by Sammy Glick.”

and we shot forward into the fast-moving tra c.

We drove up the steep winding road to her house near the top of

the Hills. The night was clear and it seemed as if the world was full
of nothing but little pulsing lights above us and below us. It was so
beautiful you thought you ought to say something about it, but
there was nothing good enough to say. I felt as if we were  oating
between two starry skies,  owing into each other at the horizon.

“Mmmmm,” I said.
“Wait till you see it from the studio window with the lights out,”

she said. “Better than the Trocadero—and no cover charge.”

It was a cozy and inviting little house, consisting of one main

living and dining room with beams across the high triangular
ceiling, and two small rooms, a bedroom and a paneled study
besides the kitchen.

“I really rented the house for the porch beyond that window,” Kit

said. “In another month I’ll be sleeping out there. You can become
surprisingly fond of Hollywood from that porch.”

She made highballs and we took them out there with us and

leaned against the railing. It did top the view from the Troc. We
could barely make out the neon lettering Trocadero half a mile
below.

“It seems wrong to know he’s behind those lights and not be able

to see him or hear him,” I said.

“Shhh,” she smiled, “I think I can hear him.”
We really paused and listened a moment.
“I think that’s only the wind rushing,” I said. “Though it may be

him at that.”

could actually see them. “Skirting all around the edge of the  oor by
silent agreement, to make sure of being seen by as many people as
possible.”

looking out to sea.

“What did you think of the play?” I said.
Instead of answering my question directly, she said, “I wonder

what would happen if Sammy used all that energy and imagination
to create something—not just to devise ways of reaching the top
without creating anything.”

We kept going in to re ll our glasses and returning to the rail and

the view again, not growing intoxicated but only more intimate.

pretty good friends. And yet all we know about each other is Sammy
Glick. I don’t think we’ve ever talked about anything else but
Sammy Glick. He’s an obsession with me—and I know a hell of a lot
about him now I wouldn’t have known without you—but, well—I’m
beginning to feel he’s a kind of defense we use against each other.”

It was a mellow evening and the moon looked like something

private that went with the porch and it was easy to talk.

New York with not enough money to last me over a month,
pounding the sidewalks begging for a job, making a goddam pest of
myself at every newspaper o ce in town because I was greatly in
need of  fteen dollars a week. I told her how I used to get up at  ve
o’clock to train racing pigeons before going to school and how, if I
ever hit this town for any kind of money, I would like to have a
small house out in the valley somewhere where I could have a
pigeon loft again. I told her a little of how balled up I felt inside
because there were times when I wanted to say what I had to say as
honestly as possible, and times when I felt as ambitious as Sammy
without being able to free myself from the sense of relationship with
everybody else in the world, which made it di cult to do anything
which I thought might cause them pain.

defense. She spoke in a monotone, keeping her head pro led to
mine, and I felt that what she was saying came not only from her
brain and her mouth but rooted deep in her, intestinal.

came closer than most people do to their goals because he  nally
did make the State Supreme Court. Through a lot of hard work and
a lot of smart politics. I don’t think either one alone would have
been enough. My father and mother shared one life between them,
which sounds very romantic except the life they shared was his,
exclusively. Her job was to see that his diet was observed and that
he was not allowed to be disturbed when he was working and that
the men who could help him were adequately feted and the wives of
his associates duly luncheoned and teaed. In other words, she
performed all her duties as automatically as any soldier. If she ever
had a thought of her own or a job of her own or even a conversation
of her own, I never knew it. Poor Mother. Their marriage always
made me think of a motorcycle with Father at the controls and
Mother sitting in the sidecar, not asking where she was going but
only if he was sure he was warm enough without the extra scarf she
brought along.”

“That sounds rather like a typical happy marriage,” I said.
“Oh, terribly typical,” she said. “But the happiness part is pretty

much bunk. At least for the person in the sidecar.”

was sixteen. Arranging his funeral was the last function Mother had
in the world. After that she was through. There wasn’t anything left
for her to do. And when she wasn’t reminiscing about him there
didn’t seem to be anything for her to say. I was really fond of her.
But I always remember what a relief it was to be back on the train
on my way to school again. I felt sorry for her of course—but that
didn’t keep her from driving me crazy. After college Mother wanted
me to go to law school. She had it all planned. I’d go into my
father’s old  rm and we’d live together and she’d take care of me.
To be very ruthless about it—what she really wanted to do was turn
me into my father, so she would have a place again. Well, I decided

I had to be ruthless about it. I was already started on my book and I
wanted to be away from her—on my own. I couldn’t see why the
hell men should have a monopoly on independence any more. I
made up my mind to stay out of sidecars. Have you ever thought of
the di erence between the two words spinster and bachelor? It
seems pretty signi cant that spinster has a thought association of
loneliness, frustration and bitterness. Bachelorhood is something
glamorous—doesn’t the sound of the word give you a sense of
adventure and freedom? So I decided I’d be a bachelor. I don’t mean
sex orgies. Most girls go through that period, either with actual
experiences or in their mind; they’ll slow down after a while if you
let them alone. I mean that when I met a man that appealed to me—
well, you know how men feel about it. I didn’t want to be a
pushover, because then it wouldn’t mean anything any more; look at
the rabbits. But I didn’t want to set up any barriers of fake coquetry
either.”

She paused and  nished her drink coolly. “If that sounds too

immoral just make believe I’m very tight—which I probably am.”

I said, “It sounds plenty moral for my money.”
“I think so,” she said. “Not the Hays O ce kind, of course. But

under the bonnet of organized morality lurks a very  lthy mind.”

We made another pilgrimage inside for drinks and out to the

porch again.

“When you were talking before,” I said, “you know, about men

that appealed to you? I couldn’t help thinking about Sammy.”

She laughed. “You mean the person we weren’t going to talk

about?”

ask. And now that he had come up, I wanted to know.

We were absolutely cockeyed, but completely coherent because

that’s the kind of mood we had set in the beginning.

you and Sammy?”

“You don’t really want me to talk about it,” she said. “You know

it’ll only make you uncomfortable.”

“Uncomfortable!” I said. “Why should it?”

As you probably guessed, our little corporal is pretty damn good in
bed. Sex hasn’t much to do with friendship or love or any other of
those virtuous relationships. Most people know that, but they don’t
like to admit it. Well, the  rst day Sammy came into my o ce to
save California from annexing itself to Russia, I was ready to tear
him limb from limb and at the same time I had this crazy desire to
know what it felt like to have all that driving ambition and frenzy
and violence inside me.”

She broke o , staring down tensely, her composure  nally ripped.
“Jesus,” she said quietly, “you get to know a man that way. And

it’s strange to see the same sel shness and cruelty and power
working out there too.”

There was a long pause. No embarrassment, just that she had

 nished.

Finally, she said, “Well, are you sore?”
“I don’t know,” I said. “But I’m glad you told me.”
“So am I,” she said. “You’re a good guy to tell things to.” She

paused. “I feel as if I’ve opened a window and hung my mind out to
air.”

and we stopped to rediscover it.

“The Chamber of Commerce boasts about the sunshine and the

palm trees and the Chinese Theater,” she said. “And the things that
have the most vitality they’re always on the defense about—the long
rains and the night winds.”

In her white gown she reminded me of a sail as she pivoted to

catch the wind squarely. She threw her head back and my eyes were
drawn to the neck line curving up to her chin as if this were some
intimate nakedness suddenly exposed.

“Kit,” I said, and I bent to kiss her. She seemed preoccupied with

something out there and oblivious of me. But as my mouth reached
hers, she turned her head, casually, as if by accident, and my lips
brushed idly against her cheek.

Nothing was said about that, nothing about that ever.

we went inside.

“I’m worried about the Guild,” she began as if we had been

talking about that all evening.

I said I had seen the blast in the Megaphone that morning.
“That wasn’t a blast,” she said. “That was just the pop of

Hanigan’s little trial balloon. But Hollywood never likes to do things
in a small way. Something tells me that when our blast comes, it
will really be a production.”

“What do you think will happen, Kit?”
“I don’t know,” she said. “I wish I did. All I know is that if it

comes to a showdown over the Authors’ League, a lot of Guild guys
who have been using their heads and their voices may have to start
using their guts.”

“But there’s no sense looking for trouble,” I said. “If it just gets

that bunch Sammy was sucking around sore at the Guild we’ll never
get anywhere.”

“I’m not so sure,” she said. “I’m beginning to wonder whether the

only way the Guild can please them—is to go out of existence.”

Just as a white evening gown was wrong for her, mascara,

powder and lipstick were more out of place than ever when she
pressed her lips together and set her jaw.

“We might as well recognize we have some of the most unique

union members in the history of organized labor. Like Brother Glick,
swimming around in that  sh bowl of champagne down there.”

o’clock curfew erased the blazing neon longhand of the Trocadero.
Sammy Glick was probably leaning back in the plush seat of his
rented Lincoln blowing cigar smoke into the face of the goddess
millions of American guys of all nationalities were making love to as
they fell asleep in  op houses, salesmen’s hotels and college
dormitories.

“Kit,” I said, “let’s have another drink. Let’s drink to a helluva

wonderful country—and a cockeyed time.”

OceanofPDF.com

That was the month everything happened. It started crazy right

o  the bat. I got a good job, the best I ever had. Kit swung it for me.
After Masaryk died, it struck me that the story of his life ought to be
a natural for pictures. His ties with American democracy gave it
special signi cance for us, and with Mussolini shooting o  his big
guns in Ethiopia and Hitler his big mouth in Germany, an anti-
fascist picture seemed like a good idea. I told Kit about it, and as
usual she didn’t show too much excitement, but a couple of weeks
later she bowled me over with the news that she had passed the idea
on to Sidney Fineman and he had given her a favorable reaction and
wanted to see me.

Fineman said he had thought of doing Masaryk before, had even

registered it, in fact, but he liked my angle on it and put me to
work. Fineman was a refutation of everything I had ever heard
about producers. His o ce was large but in good taste, with real
books in the bookcases and theatrical prints on the walls. He could
express a thought without making you  nd the words for it and an
emotion without resorting to profanity. He knew much more about
Masaryk than I did. He didn’t want to be yessed. He told me he
could only hire me week-to-week but not to get panicky, that he
wouldn’t even ask to see what I had done for at least four weeks.

“Even then,” he said, “I don’t care if you only have a handful of

pages as long as there’s something worth going on with. The danger
in this story is that it will be a series of lectures on democracy.
Moving pictures haven’t got time for sermons. Try to get in the habit
of thinking in terms of pictorial action.”

He gave me an example I’ll always remember. Fineman once

imported a famous playwright from Broadway at  ve thousand a
week. The  rst job the playwright had to do was an opening scene

in a picture where he had to establish that the husband was tiring of
his wife. Fifteen thousand dollars later the playwright brought in a
twenty-page scene. Fineman thought the dialogue was brilliant but
way over length for the start of the picture. The playwright
protested that you couldn’t cut a line out of his scene without
ruining it. Fineman showed the scene to his director, Ray
MacKenna, one of the few men left in the business who got his
training in the Mack Sennett two-reel comedy school. Mac sent the
scene back to Fineman with one of his own. It was typed out on half
a page. It read:

INT. ELEVATOR MEDIUM SHOT 
Husband and wife in evening clothes. Husband wearing top hat.

REVERSE ANGLE 
As elevator door opens and classy dame enters.

CLOSE SHOT HUSBAND AND WIFE 
Get husband’s reaction to new dame. Removes hat with  ourish.

Wife looks from dame to husband’s hat to husband. Then glares at him
as we

CUT TO:

Fineman chuckled at me over his curved pipe.
“Mac couldn’t write a complete sentence,” he said. “But that was

great writing—for the screen.”

I couldn’t wait to get out of his o ce and start writing the

greatest screenplay of all time. I hadn’t felt like that since I ran into
an English teacher in college who had the e ect on you of a literary
laxative. You felt you would have to run out of class before it was
over and rush back to your room and let it all out of your system.
Kit’s enthusiasm for motion pictures had always been a little hard to
take. But now I remembered something she had said somewhere
along the line, “The most exciting way ever invented to tell a story

is with a moving-picture camera.” I couldn’t wait to get into my
o ce and begin telling it.

is a pleasure he’ll never know, the joy of writing that  rst line on
the pad, which sounds so beautiful now and so lousy later, the
tremendous pleasure and labor of creating something you believe in.

Sammy looked in around lunchtime. He wasn’t dressed like a

writer. More like a  ght champ or a sweepstakes winner. The crepe
soles on his white kid shoes seemed to be half a foot high and the
 ower in his lapel stood out like a red light against his white suede
jacket.

“You look like a fugitive from Esquire,” I said.
He had to laugh because it was supposed to be a gag, but I don’t

think his heart was in it.

a bill of goods. I want you to know I put in a good word for you.
Hear you got a terri c story.”

You could feel him selling your story back to you the same way

he would his own.

“I haven’t got any story yet,” I said. “Just a start, an idea.”
“I bet it’s terri c, sweetheart,” he said. “I hope you make a

million dollars.”

got you working for peanuts. Three hundred and  fty a week.”

found out so fast.

“I got a pipeline from the front o ce,” he said. “Me and Dan

Young’s secretary are like this.”

His hands performed an obscene gesture. “I mean Young’s

secretary and I. I wound up with her at the last studio Christmas
party and she still thinks I’m in love with her.”

“Sammy,” I said, “I’m trying to work.”
“Al, why don’t you cut it out?” Sammy kidded. “Your sense of fair

play is going to ruin the racket for the rest of us.”

little lunchee. I’ll introduce you around the commissary. Cooped up

in here all day isn’t going to get you anywhere. You got to spread
your wings a little bit.”

lunch with Sammy Glick, there was only one thing on the menu,
Sammy Glick.

couple of seats for us at the writers’ table.”

Julian hadn’t changed. He looked a little healthier, he was wearing
a new suit which was just like the old one and his handshake didn’t
seem so frightened, but you would never have taken him for a hit
writer and that’s what he was becoming. Studio environment
seemed to have no more e ect on him than his tenement
neighborhood had. He and Blanche had never been so happy, he
said. They had rented a little cottage overlooking the ocean near
Topanga Canyon and they had a baby coming along in the fall. He
was even getting his novel  nished.

I said I couldn’t believe it. Everybody said it was absolutely

impossible out here to do any writing of your own.

“I know,” he said. “That’s what everybody says. But I don’t

understand it. Every Saturday, unless I’m doing a rush job, I leave
here at noon. Blanche and I go for a long walk along the beach, I
take a quick dip—I’ve been doing it since the  rst of March—and
then I write until I go to bed. You couldn’t want a better place to
work than right there over the ocean.”

Sammy hadn’t even sat down with us yet. He was all over the

place like a headwaiter. We could hear him yelling to somebody
across the room.

“He spends two hours here every day,” Julian said. “This is where

he really goes to work. He’s the commissary genius. I don’t know
whether you’ve noticed our screen credits or not but they always
say—Story by Sammy Glick—Screenplay by Sammy Glick and
Julian Blumberg. You know where he got all those story credits?
Right here in the commissary.”

The story of how he did it was so intriguing that we both forgot to

order. Sammy would walk up to a director and say, “Spencer Tracy
and Marlene Dietrich in Titanic. Do I have to say any more?”

leave it in his lap. The director has been desperate for a socko story
all year. Tracy and Dietrich in Titanic. Jesus, it sounds like
something. Natural suspense. And two great characters. Maybe
Spence is a good two- sted minister who tries to straighten Marlene
out. Marlene is a tramp, of course. He’s real. She’s anything for a
laugh. Then, even though the boat is going down you bring the
audience up with a hell of a lift because Marlene suddenly sees the
light.

Meanwhile Sammy bumps into a supervisor. “I was just telling

Chick Tyler my new story,” he says. “He went o  his nut about it.
Spencer Tracy and Marlene Dietrich in Titanic. Do I have to say any
more?”

And he drops the hot potato in the supervisor’s lap and runs

again. The supervisor knows Sammy hasn’t missed yet. And he’s
been trying to get a cast like that ever since he’s been made a
supervisor. So he drops by Tyler’s table.

“Sammy Glick tells me you’re hot for his Titanic story,” he says.
“Yeah,” Tyler says, “I think the kid’s got something. And it’s right

down my alley.”

By this time Tyler is practically thinking up the acceptance speech

he’ll make on receiving the Academy Award. “I could get a great
picture out of that,” he says. “Remember what I did with Strange
Voyage? That’s for me!”

All this time Sammy is hopping from table to table, pollinating his

story like a bumblebee, catching them as they go in and out, asking
everybody who can possibly help him if he has to say anything more
and running o  before they can answer. Everybody is now asking
everybody else if they have heard Sammy’s Titanic story. And by this
time, through unconscious generosity, they have contributed to the
story two characters, a beginning, middle and a climax. Now
Sammy manages to cross the path of the General Manager in Charge

of Production. Sammy has heard that he’s been a little burned lately
because people are saying he is losing touch with studio activities.

have told you my story for Dietrich and Tracy. Titanic? Everybody
who’s heard it seems very excited about it.”

ignorant of anything. “Yes, I have, Glick,” he says. “Sounds very
interesting. I’m going to call you all in for a conference on it some
time this week.”

When they all get together, all anyone knows is that everybody

else thinks it’s great. And since everybody has gone on record, no
one is willing to admit just how little about the story he knows. So
the safest thing is to let Sammy get something on paper, which
means that Julian has to start dreaming up a story called Titanic
while the trade papers and Parsons naturally pass on to their readers
what Sammy has told them, that everyone on his lot is saying his
epic drama Titanic is absolutely the greatest vehicle either of those
two great stars has ever had.

mild wonder and deep resignation.

at the long table, selling me to them and them to me.

to meet the sweetest guy in the world.”

afraid to say anything unless he thought it would get a laugh. One
of the writers had ordered wine and a young producer who had just
been graduated from the writers’ ranks asked him, “What are you
Guild members drinking these days—producers’ blood?”

It got a good laugh and you could hear him repeating it with

variations. “At the Guild Board meetings they toast Der Tag with
producers’ blood. Hey, Joe, know what Brown is drinking …?”

Everybody kidded about the Guild back and forth, but I felt that

gagging was really the o cial court language and that underneath it
all you could feel the friction growing.

shouted. “Then all us downtrodden writers can become producers
and we’ll punish the producers by making them get down on their
hands and knees—and write!”

Some of the laughter was automatic, some frightened, some

reactionary.

up everything about Hollywood that was splendid and crazy and
hopeful and terrifying.

You can choose your own adjectives for the front-page story in

the Megaphone that was waiting for me on my desk one morning, for
like everybody else I couldn’t start my day without reading the little
trade journals from cover to cover.

GLICK GETS $80,000 FOR 

LIVE WIRE FROM WORLD-WIDE

—

RETURNS TO HOME LOT TO ADAPT 

OWN PLAY AT $1250 A WEEK

That, as Sammy would say, was the convincer. I decided that the

history of Hollywood was nothing but twenty years of feverish
preparation for the arrival of Sammy Glick.

Sammy came in a little later, of course, making the rounds to take

his bows. He was wearing a new out t, gray checks of contrasting
sizes for the coat and pants. And the  ower which was becoming a
 xture. “Sammy,” I said, “I read the bad news this morning. May I
be the  rst to console you?”

He thought I meant it as a gag. But I assured him I was serious. “I

thought this play was going to put you in the two-thousand-a-week
class,” I said. “But I see you’re only getting twelve- fty.”

I was right. All the excitement of that astronomical dough was

over already. He was really eating his heart out about that extra
seven- fty. Of Hollywood’s one thousand screen writers, there might
be three or four dozen getting twelve- fty. But the two-grand-a-

week boys were really the inner circle. It was the di erence between
the Big League and Triple-A.

do it. Why should I tie myself down?”

bound them for more than two years, so that at the end of that time
they would all be free to take a strike vote if that became necessary
to win recognition for the Guild. That was called Article XII. It was
going to be called a lot of other things before the month was over.
Kit was a very persuasive girl, but I had never expected to see the
day when Sammy would be loyal to his own mother, much less nine
hundred fellow writers he was breaking his neck and his heart to
outdistance. And I told him so.

“Hell, no,” he said. “That’s not why. If you ask me, the Guild has

a helluva nerve telling us to do anything like that. If I signed a
contract now it would probably get me there in a couple of steps,
probably  fteen hundred and then seventeen- fty. But I’m catching
the express now, baby. I’m getting o  at my station in one stop.”

Guild’s struggle for a foothold in Hollywood and Sammy’s struggle
for a stranglehold, we were talking about two di erent things. That
only showed how much I had to learn about Hollywood and the
Guild and, in spite of all these years and all my lessons, Sammy
Glick.

A few days later the Megaphone had a new headline that they

were so happy about, it sounded as if they could hardly resist
printing HOORAY at the end of it.

OPPOSITION GROUP FORMS WITHIN GUILD!

Responding to a rising tide of resentment among Guild members
against their Executive Board for selling out their autonomy to the
group of Eastern racketeers and Reds who controlled the Authors’
League, the news story chortled, the responsible element has formed
a Committee of Five who have pledged themselves to rescue the
writers’ ship from the hands of the crackpots and adventurers and

steer it back to the port of sanity again. The  ve distinguished
gentlemen who were so unsel shly volunteering their time and
prestige to rescue their fellow artists from destruction were
Lawrence Paine, Harold Godfrey Wilson, John McCarter, Robert
Gri n and—Sammy Glick.

me any more than this copy-boy punk of mine should be taking it
for granted that he was one of the spokesmen for the Guild elite
without, as far as I could detect, ever having written a line. As I
watched Sammy at the big-shot writers’ table in the commissary
that noon, I kept wondering where the hell it was all going to end
and how many pairs of shoes Sammy must have collected by now
and whether he was twenty-four years old or twenty- ve.

I caught up with Kit on our way out and we fell in step.
“Take a walk with me,” she said.
We walked out past the sound stages and the machine shops and

the labor gangs to the back lot. We walked past the New York street
and up through the Latin Quarter of Paris until we came to a South
Sea Island with a little beach leading down to real water. We
crossed a little bridge to the island and sat down on the sand in
front of a native hut. The hot April sun was just what the set
designer ordered. I dug my hands into the warm sand and lay on my
back, looking up through a palm tree supported with piano wire, at
the cloudless sky.

“Where are we?” I said.
“This used to be Hollywood,” she said with a poker face and

voice. “Before the Depression.”

“If a rescue ship comes by,” I said, “hide.”
She gave a little laugh that seemed to release her inside.
We both lay back and laughed in the sun, not so much at what we

were saying but at the idea of being on a desert island together. She
started to say something else and I got ready to laugh again but she
crossed me up.

“Those sons of bitches.”
“Who?” I said. I was still on our island.
“The Committee of Five,” she said.

“What do you think?” I said.
“The panic is on,” she said.
“Some of the boys seem to think they’re just sucking around for

better jobs,” I said. “Others think it’s the Executive Board’s fault for
pushing things too fast. You don’t know what to think.”

“I know what to think,” she said.
“But what are they doing it for?” I said. “What do they get out of

it?”

“Because they’re all doing the same thing for di erent reasons. Start
with Larry Paine, for instance.”

Listening to her gave me the impression of watching a river

moving too swiftly, cutting its banks down sharp and straight,
uncompromisingly.

“Larry’s a good writer. But a complicated one. There’s nothing

like a rich man’s son who’s done a little starving, just enough to
scare him into becoming a self-made man. He’s a recluse and the
kind of a drinker who reaches for that bottle when he wakes up in
the morning. Something’s gone wrong. The way he laughs, for
instance. It gets louder and harsher until I don’t know what it
becomes, but it isn’t laughter. And those eyes, everybody notices
those sunken, hurt eyes. He’s been nursing his paranoia along for
years. I think he really believes the Guild was organized just to
deprive him of his individuality!”

Wilson is an old boozer who had written himself out ten years ago,
and Jack McCarter is a young boozer who never had anything in
him to write out and just coasted in behind Wilson.”

Bob Gri n, she thought, was one of the most competent writers

in the industry, naturally conservative but with a straight-from-the-
shoulder integrity. “I think the only trouble with Bob is that he has
read one too many editorials in the Megaphone about our being
cannibalistically inclined toward producers and wanting to replace
Louis B. Mayer with Joe Stalin.

to lead the writers to their New Jerusalem.”

“How much support do you think they have?” I said.
“Nobody knows,” she said. “They still have ten days to work over

the membership before the general meeting. None of us has ever
been organized before. It’s hard to say how we’ll hold up. Sitting up
there on the platform with the Board all year, I’ve had a chance to
watch the membership react. They blow hot and cold. Maybe that’s
because they’re high-strung and they’re individualistic and, except
for the handful of left-wingers, none of them knows a labor tactic
from a sacri ce scene.

“And of course they haven’t learned to work together. With

longshoremen or fruit pickers that probably grows right out of their
jobs. But with us it’s just the opposite. We’re pitted against each
other. Two or three times I’ve worked on the same script with
somebody else without either of us knowing it. That’s like rubbing
two  ghting cocks together. I’d say it’s  fty- fty right now as to
whether the Guild weathers the storm or not.”

jumped nimbly to her feet. “Well, what do you say? Think we’ve
destroyed enough of the industry for one day? Or shall we go back
to the o ce and commit sabotage by writing the stinkingest scenes
we possibly can?”

is sabotage,” I said, as we started back toward the writers’ building
again.

Those were the Ten Days That Shook Hollywood. It was

earthquake weather. Writers woke up excited or went to bed
frightened. They fought battles of words in which the injuries
sustained were nervous stomach and insomnia.

on his way home that Friday evening.

“How would you like to come down to the beach for lunch

tomorrow?” he said gravely.

I said I would like to but I had planned to come back to the studio

because I wanted to get my treatment in before the end of the
month and the rumpus all week had put me behind schedule.

over with you.”

“Okay,” I said, “I guess I can work late tonight instead.”

We drove out in her car with the top down. We drove past
Westwood Village, the home of UCLA, which is either the model for
Hollywood’s version of campus life or vice versa; past Sawtelle, the
Old Soldiers’ Home, where veterans of our more recent wars live out
their days watching cars go by; past Santa Monica with its swanky
swimming clubs and its public beaches, where bronzed and pretty
girls in little bathing suits wear sailor hats and munch hot dogs as
they skip barefooted across the blistering pavement to the sand.
Then we turned north up the coast highway curving to the shore,
bordered by matchbox cottages, snug and dilapidated, with names
like Crow’s Nest and Joe’s Joynt.

Finally we reached a group of cottages which were a little newer,

with the paint not yet eaten away by the salt air, and one of these
was Julian’s.

The house was clean and compact and shiplike. The long narrow

dining room faced the sea, which was so close to us that big waves
would shake the walls and send the surf swishing up below us.
Blanche was one of those e cient little Jewish mothers who look as
if that was what they were meant for from their  rst moment of
puberty.

Julian was dressed more informally than I had ever seen him

before, in a loose- tting dungaree suit and beach sandals, but he
would never look really sporty. In spite of his natural graveness, he
did his best to be jolly through lunch, but his sensitivity was of too
simple a kind to conceal his uneasiness.

Later, sitting on his porch overlooking the ocean, we heard the

cause of it.

“You know,” he said, “all the time that I’ve been working at

World-Wide I’ve been working from week to week, without a

contract. Two days ago,” he continued sadly, “they o ered me a
seven-year contract. Beginning at  ve hundred dollars a week.”

at his ocean.

 ying around World-Wide that writers were being o ered unusually
attractive contracts in order to tempt them into breaking the Guild
provision. But I hadn’t really believed it. This was the  rst actual
case I had heard of. Kit and I had been called in to help Julian
wrestle with his conscience.

I didn’t say anything. I watched Kit.
“Unless all of us are free agents two years from now the Guild is

licked,” she said. “God knows, none of us want to strike. But if we
aren’t even in a position to threaten one, we’re just charging a
machine gun with our bare hands and we might as well fold.”

upset.

“That’s all right for you to say, Miss Sargent. You’re all

established. But Julian is  nally getting a good start. And with our
baby coming …”

Jesus, what a hell of a complicated world, I thought. Here is a kid

who is  nally getting the break he’s been waiting for and deserves
and he’s dying to take it, and who the hell can blame him, and Kit,
that coldhearted humanitarian, isn’t going to let him.

“Julian might still be ghost writing if it weren’t for the Guild,” she

said. “Of course, if we ever have a Guild shop in Hollywood, all the
interests of writers will be protected; but the ones it will help most
are the boys like Julian, who aren’t able to take any kind of a stand
alone.”

“Then what does he pay his agent ten percent for?” Blanche said.
“Agents can help just so much. But when we were asked to take

that  fty-percent cut my  rst year out here, the agents were swept
along with the rest of us. You probably don’t remember, but the
crafts that were organized were the only ones that didn’t have to
take it.”

watching a tennis match. I tried to make out which side he was on.
He looked miserable when Kit spoke and even more miserable when
Blanche retaliated.

was eligible. But, God, when I think of the di erence between  ve
hundred a week and losing my job …”

“Who says you’re going to lose your job?” Kit said, almost angrily.
“Sammy,” Julian said. “He had a talk with me yesterday. He told

me what a damn fool he thought I was, if I didn’t sign it. He said he
had it con dentially from the front o ce that if I didn’t sign it I’d
never work for World-Wide again.”

Oh, Sammy, you frantic marathoner, I thought, you bastard I used

to hate and almost understand! You success!

“How can you possibly ask him to turn it down?” Blanche said.
Blanche is right, I thought. Blanche is right and Kit is right and

never the twain shall meet.

“I’m not asking him to turn it down,” Kit said relentlessly. “That’s

something you’ll have to decide yourselves. All I can do is tell you
what turning it down means.”

Nebbish, poor Julian, I thought.

When we left, the sun was taking its evening dip, slipping down into
the ocean inch by inch like a fat woman afraid of the water.

Instead of turning back toward Hollywood, we started north, just

driving anywhere with the top down and the sunset just beyond our
reach. The ocean and the clouds were red when we started out, soon
after deep purple with a splinter moon giving the night a subtle,
indirect lighting. We drove up past Malibu, left the last houses
behind. The beach had disappeared and in its place were turbulent
rock formations jutting out into the sea. On the other side of the
road stretched pasture lands and cultivated  elds.

As we took a hairpin turn Kit said, “There’s my little beach down

there.”

I saw nothing but steep rocks below us piling into the water.
“You can’t see it from the road,” she said. “The rocks are too high

around it. I found it one hot day driving up to Frisco. It’s a beautiful
place to go swimming in the raw.”

“How would you like to go in now?” I said.
She put her foot on the brake. “Okay,” she said. “It might be

warm enough.”

any towels.”

tennis stu .”

“I hope so,” I said unconvincingly.
She found them. I almost broke my neck on the jagged path that

angled down to the little beach that lay concealed and virginal
below. Natural hydraulics working overtime for a couple of million
years had scooped it right out of the cli s.

moon is being held up by piano wire.”

stronghold of individualism.”

“Was Sammy ever down here with you?”
She shook her head. “I pointed it out to him once. But he didn’t

want to stop. No one ever taught him how to play.”

We undressed silently, seeing each other only as silhouettes. She

was ready  rst and didn’t wait for me. Out of the corner of my eye I
saw her moving swiftly toward the water, her tanned arms and legs
and head blending into the dark, the rest of her body that had been
concealed from the sun looking from the back like a white, tight-
 tting bathing suit. She was long-legged, almost hipless, V-shaped
from her waist to her broad shoulders.

The water was so cold it made my heart feel like an ice cube. I

plowed madly, determined to stay in as long as she did. Her stroke
was a smooth rhythmic crawl. She swam out beyond me and back
and said, “Ready to go in?”

I’ll have to dive down and  nd my feet  rst. I think they both

dropped o .”

“They’ll probably come in with the tide,” she said.
Five minutes later we were dressed again, warm and dry with

towels around our heads and our bodies tingling. We sat there with
our arms around our knees, catching our breath.

“What are you thinking about?” she said.
“Julian,” I said. “How awfully sorry I feel for Julian.”
“Poor little guy,” she said.
“That’s not the way you sounded a couple of hours ago,” I said.

“Jesus, you were cold-blooded. I almost felt like telling him to take
that contract.”

right on the borderline. One word of sympathy would have been
enough to tip him the other way.”

“I don’t like it,” I said. “I’ll be damned if I do. This isn’t just a

character you can X-out and rewrite. This is a guy’s life you’re
playing around with.”

want a Guild we have to  ght it through. We can’t have half a
Guild. It’s like a strike. You either scab or you try to stop the scabs.
But you can’t strike and feel sorry for the scabs at the same time.”

“Why not?” I said. “The strikers only strike because they want

something out of life they aren’t getting. The poor scabs are in the
same boat. I saw strikers beat hell out of a scab in my hometown
once. He was just a desperate, hungry little guy. Being a scab wasn’t
his idea of what he wanted to do in this world.”

“That’s pity,” she said. “Pity is always good for a couple of

Christmas baskets for the poor. But that leaves three-hundred-and-
sixty-four other days to take care of. Your attitude is very
picturesque, from a distance. But try bringing it closer home. What
do you think Sammy is but a desperate, hungry little guy?”

made suit. He was hungrier than ever after  ve-dollar dinners at
Marcel’s.

“But Sammy is still in the Guild,” I said. “I think you ought to try

to get together with his bunch. Work out some sort of a

compromise, maybe. It doesn’t seem fair to put guys like Julian on
such a spot.”

“Everybody was doing it and it was absolutely safe. But now I think
he’s getting ready to jump. All he’s waiting for is a nice, soft spot to
land.”

“Just the same,” I argued, “his bunch is still a powerful minority

in the Guild. I think you ought to give them the bene t of the
doubt.”

good. But I’ll think it over. I’ll put it up to the Board.”

The headline in the Megaphone the following Saturday read:

PREDICT CIVIL WAR AT GUILD SESSION TONIGHT!

But we didn’t have to wait that long. All the writers on our lot—
some  fty or sixty of us—were called together in one of the
projection rooms just before lunch. And I can think of nothing better
calculated to take away an appetite.

The atmosphere was electric. All of us seemed to be strung

together with high-tension wires. The program began with Dan
Young, the barrel-bodied, red-faced, profanely earnest studio
manager, who seemed to feel that the story of how he had risen
from truck driver right here at this studio to his present importance
was a devastating argument for writers giving up the Guild
foolishness and making the studio one big happy family. He even
hinted that those who refused to participate in his family life (on his
terms) would  nd themselves led by the hand to the studio gate and
told never to darken his payroll again.

After he  nished, to cautious applause, he introduced the next

speaker, the white-haired boy of the happy family, whom he
laughingly described as “a member of your own ranks who seems to
have a little more sense than the rest of you.”

way the studio was asking us to. If he had used the  rst person
singular instead of the plural he would have been right.

On the way out Sammy caught up with me and took my arm

protectively. “Don’t stick your neck out too far, Al,” he said. “After
all everybody’s got to look out for Number One.”

“Sure,” I said, “but we can’t all have a genius for it like you have.”
I strolled back to the o ce with Kit. “We couldn’t have done

better if we had organized that meeting ourselves,” she said. “That
won more votes for us than it did for them. I was afraid a little
pressure like that might run the boys out of the Guild. But it only
seemed to pull them together. Now they’re really sore.”

“Where do you think Sammy is going to end up?” I said.
“It depends on what kind of a deal he can make with Young,” she

said. “He’s probably holding out for general-manager-in-charge-of-
production! ”

The police department had taken the Megaphone’s prediction of civil
war at the membership meeting seriously. Twenty or thirty
policemen had planted themselves ominously around the hall to
preserve law and order, staring curiously at the  ve or six hundred
writers  lling the auditorium.

Just before the meeting opened Kit stopped at my seat on her way

to the platform and said animatedly, “Well, Al, it looks as if it’s
going to be run your way.”

Then she was up there, facing the microphone. She ran her hand

back over her hair once  rmly, the way she always did before she
began to speak. She spoke with an emphasis and implication of
surprise that caught the membership immediately.

“For the past four weeks, which we will always look back on

fondly as the Days of the Terror  …”—she waited for her laugh
—”there has been mounting confusion on the question of Guild
autonomy. To satisfy those critics of the Authors’ League
amalgamation plan who honestly fear the loss of our independence,

I propose that we vote tonight only on the principle of a liation
with the League, reserving the right to postpone o cial action on it
until the membership is reassured that this does not mean the
transference of Guild control from Hollywood to New York,
Moscow, Mars or the dining room of the Algonquin.”

what she meant by getting my way.

forward, expecting him to light the fuse that would set o  the
explosion. His gaunt, melancholy face was almost expressionless.

down.

Almost the entire audience rose spontaneously. The applause

lasted several minutes. Digni ed writers jumped up on their feet
and whistled. They weren’t cheering Paine. They were cheering the
miracle of unity and peace.

appropriate,” the President announced, “that the second motion we
must vote on tonight will be made by a member who this morning
turned down a major studio seven-year contract doubling his
salary.”

a funny thing, I thought as I clapped with everybody else, we like to
think of ourselves as the blasé, sophisticated people. And the  rst
teaspoonful of emotion lays us right in the aisles.

fright, a typewritten sheet of paper trembling in his hand.

the Executive Board in ordering us not to sign contracts binding us
and our material for more than two years from today and that this
Article XII remain in e ect until the Producers’ Committee opens
negotiations with us for a minimum basic agreement.”

This motion was seconded by none other than that courageous

champion of the underdog, Samuel Glick. Now I am ready to face
my Maker, I thought. For  ve years I’ve been waiting for Sammy

Glick to make one positive gesture in the direction of the
Brotherhood of Man. Now I can die in peace.

modest gesture. That would have been too much. That would have
been the regeneration stu  that has made so many pretty endings
for the movies.

spokesman for our Committee,” he said, “I wish to add that at a
conciliation meeting with your Board just before we came in
tonight, all di erences were ironed out and our Committee pledged
its support to the two motions on the  oor. As loyal members of the
Guild we are ready to carry out this pledge.”

scored the winning touchdown. Sammy stood there at the mike
longer than he had to, taking the bows. Suddenly everybody was
loving everybody else. The cops must have thought the world had
really gone nuts. They are sent to prevent screen writers from
butchering each other and the crazy bastards do nothing but get up
and make love to each other.

Everything after that was passed by acclamation. Someone got up

and urged that all the Guild o cers be re-elected as a gesture of our
support, and we all yelled Aye. Then Kit took the mike again to
propose that Paine, Wilson, McCarter, Gri n and Glick be added to
the Executive Board, to demonstrate the Guild’s concern for
safeguarding the interests of the minority elements, and we all
roared Aye again. The meeting was topped by an almost unanimous
vote in favor of the two motions, and as much of the audience as
possible adjourned to celebrate in the bar across the street.

We all piled into the gaudy little joint and turned an early May

evening into a New Year’s Eve midnight, only this time we really
had something to celebrate.

Sammy and Kit and I buried the hatchet in a bottle of Scotch.
“Hey, Kit, what did I tell ya?” I kept repeating myself, being very

gay and probably very boring. “This way everybody’s happy. Isn’t
this just what I said oughta happen?”

Glick, you of bastard, you know me. Don’t I always tell you just
what I think of you? Well, when you were shoveling it at the studio
this morning, I says to myself: There goes the biggest sonofabitch in
the whole goddam world. It’s like the movie ads. Know what I
mean, Sammy? See Sammy Glick in Ima Sonofabitch. Even bigger
than last week, bigger ’n when he played Al Manheim for a sucker
in the Record o ce, bigger every minute. But tonight! Tonight you
really fooled me, Sammy. You  nally came through and I’m proud
of you. Hey, bartender, hit us all again and put your goddam money
away, Kit, this one is on me.”

And Sammy, drinking and kidding but never abandoned, “Well,

Al, I’m really tickled to death. I think you and Kit had me pegged
wrong about being against the Guild, but now that it’s patched up I
know our out t’s going to go places and I’m all for it.”

going to stop running. Maybe he’s decided he’s gone as far as he
needs and now he can cut o  the motor and stop running people
down. That thought made me very happy. It’s wonderful what a few
drinks of Scotch will do on an empty brain.

The following day was Saturday and, after we knocked o  at noon,
Sammy took us to the swank tennis club he was very proud of
joining. I couldn’t see where Sammy had had time enough to attend
to his private needs properly, much less learn tennis, but he had. We
started volleying, and I thought this is one place where Sammy eats
humble pie, but he started right o  hitting them back one after
another without much style but with plenty of con dence.

“When the hell did you learn this?” I yelled across the net.
“I just started taking lessons two weeks ago,” he said. “From the

best teacher in the country. Five dollars an hour. You ought to try
him, Al.”

“I don’t have to,” I said. “I’ve been playing tennis since I was a

kid.”

wild as hell.

“I’ll play you for dough,” he said, “and beat you.”
I’ve always thought tennis is a better indication of character than

handwriting or any of those other things they use. For instance, I
liked to just get out there and slug the ball until I worked up a good
sweat knocking most of the balls outside without paying too much
attention to the score. Of the three of us Kit was the closest to a
tennis player. She served her second serve just as hard as her  rst,
chasing after her ball to the net and holding her ground with a good
sense of volley and a sti  net game. Sammy was always reminding
you of the score, especially if he were ahead. He played a smart,
cautious game, getting everything back, making his awkward puny
shots count by mixing up maddening lobs with shrewd little drop
shots.

kids, whom Sammy promptly chose as his partner, and then Kit beat
Sammy 6–3 and then Sammy turned around and beat me 10-8, in
spite of the fact that I looked three or four times as good as he did
and had him set point half a dozen times. I really think the margin
between us was that he objected to losing more than I did. He had
to win the little things just as much as the big ones; and the more I
thought of it, the more incredible it seemed that he had backed
down on his Guild position the way he had the night before.

A few nights later I was sitting in bed reading when there was a
knock on the door. I grabbed for my robe, surprised that anyone
would be knocking, more surprised to  nd Kit.

“Well,” she said, “now I’ve seen everything! Got a drink?”
She followed me into the kitchenette while I poured one for each

of us.

“I’m afraid we congratulated ourselves a little too soon,” she said.

“Tonight Sammy and his playmates came to their  rst Board
meeting. And it turned out to be their last.”

I could feel it coming. I could feel him running again.
“Well, they walked out on us,” she said. “Just got up and calmly

announced they were resigning and walked out. Just told us what
we could do with our pledges and took a powder.”

She was still too overwhelmed to be really sore. It was the  rst

time I had ever seen her really ru ed.

“My God! All of them?”
“All except Bob Gri n. He was absolutely furious. He said, ‘Boys

and girls, everything in Hollywood always seems to run to the
super-colossal. I only regret that the Committee of which I have
been an active member had to give you the most super-colossal
double-cross I ever saw.’ And he promised that he was going to stick
with us to follow through the compromise program that the so-
called Sanity Committee had pledged itself to. He was really
magni cent. I had a hunch about him. You may not always agree
with him but at least his convictions are never for sale. He ended up
by saying, ‘They say keeping pledges is a Rover-Boyish sentiment. I
guess I’ll just never grow up.’ ”

“Do you think Sammy and his pals were bought out?”
“I don’t know,” Kit said. “I’m too mixed up to think anything

tonight. But I felt Gri n thinks so.”

“What’s the pay-o  going to be?” I said.
She shook her head back and forth several times wearily. “Oh,

hell, I don’t know, Al. I guess it’ll be interesting to see. If we live
through it.”

We didn’t have to wait very long. The next morning there were

rumors  ying around about the number of Guild members who had
already sent in resignations. First I heard ten and then I heard a
hundred. Writers gave each other funny looks as they passed the
stories around. What do you think, pals? they were asking each other
silently, think we’re licked, think it’s getting time to quit? It was funny,
that hot-and-cold business, the same pressure that made them so
tough the day of the meeting was beginning to break them down
now. Even though Sammy, Paine, Wilson and McCarter couldn’t
have had more than forty or  fty followers, their unexpected run-
out had sprung a leak in the hull for fear to rush in.

another broadside.

red face was wrinkled in a triumphant grin.

wanted this Guild, believe me I’d be for it myself one hundred
percent. But how do you expect us to take you seriously when you
can’t even agree among yourselves? Some of the biggest writers
have quit already—and we understand more resignations are
coming in every hour. Now what do you say we forget about the
whole business—try to make World-Wide one big happy family the
way we used to be?”

He paused and smiled again. “Okay, boys, that’s all,” he said

casually. “You’re going to be given resignation forms on your way
out. You can turn them in to me any time within the next forty-eight
hours.”

He didn’t say what would happen to us if we didn’t. He didn’t

have to. Sammy Glick would attend to that, the Sammy Glicks.

one alone and afraid, each one thinking of his own wife and his own
script that was just beginning to come along so well and his own
house in Beverly or Westwood or overlooking the ocean. We walked
out as if those forms were the certi cates of a disgraceful and
contagious disease which each one of us thought he was the only
one to have.

didn’t, but somehow I just couldn’t get around to it. I stuck a sheet
of paper in my typewriter and started to write about Masaryk. But I
found myself wondering what Masaryk would do if he had been
asked to resign from the Guild. So I put on my coat and went home
early. I didn’t feel like seeing anybody so I got a little food out of
the icebox and had supper alone, just me and that damned piece of
paper.

Then I sat there in a ringside seat for the wrestling match between

my conscience and my ambition, a  ght to the  nish, with a forty-

eight-hour time-limit and  nally I left them there on the canvas with
a headlock on each other and called Kit.

“Kit? Did I wake you up?”
“No, I just got in. I was running some pictures at the studio. Two

stinkers.”

“Listen, Kit,” I said. “I’ve been wanting to talk to you all night. I

guess I’d like to be a hero and  ush this goddam resignation blank
down the drain. But there’s no use kidding myself. I feel like a tug-
of-war, the whole damned business, the rope and both teams
pulling.”

was, “I know, Al. It’s very tough.”

“Oh, Christ,” I said, “I suppose I’m making it a lot tougher than it

is, but I was just beginning to get the feel of this picture thing. This
Masaryk job was—it still is exciting as hell, and Fineman is a swell
gent; there’s an awful lot I could learn from him. And yet I just can’t
see myself pulling a Sammy Glick.”

“It isn’t quite that bad,” she said. “I’m afraid everybody’s signing

them, Al. I hear we have two hundred resignations already. I don’t
feel like telling anybody to go out and be a martyr.”

“You didn’t worry like that about Julian.”
“That’s di erent,” she said. “That’s when it looked as if we were

going to win. We had to take that chance. And then, well, maybe I
am being a little sel sh about it.”

of a ection.

“Are you going to sign it, Kit?”
“No,” she said. “But frankly, I’m in a much better spot. Three or

four of my best credits all happened to come along this year. And
they seem to feel that Keeler and I are clicking as a writer-director
team. Of course, this may change their minds. But it does take less
courage for me to hold out.”

“In other words,” I said, “you’d sign it.”
“Al, I’m afraid that’s a lonely battle you’ve got to  ght out with

yourself,” she said. “But I wouldn’t feel you were ratting out if you
did. It’s too late for that.”

“Okay, Kit,” I said. “Thanks. I’ll think it over. See you tomorrow.”

When I went in to the studio next morning the form was still
unsigned, but I had made up my mind. For a guy who didn’t care six
months ago whether the screen writers were organized into a Guild
or a sewing circle I had gone down the line for them every way I
could. It had to stop somewhere. After all, I had come out here to be
a writer, not a second John L. Lewis. So I took the paper out and
scribbled my name at the bottom quickly, as if trying to keep myself
from knowing what I was doing.

Then I went to work and I began to see my story again because

my mind felt free for the  rst time in weeks.

Then Sammy Glick came in.
I hadn’t talked to him since his famous coup d’état I had passed

him in the hall a couple of times and had thought of saying
something insulting, but what was the use. I had said it all the day
he marched in when I wasn’t looking and invaded four inches into
my column a long time ago. Anything I would have told him now
would have just given him a laugh and maybe given me ulcers.

He came in with a smile stretching from his right ear to that

 ower he always wore in his lapel. I went on typing. He slung his
leg over the corner of my desk. I looked up. In his hand was my
resignation blank.

“Well, I see you’re being smart for once,” he said.
I tried to remember if Sammy had ever handed me a compliment

before.

“That’s just what I dropped in to check with you about,” he said.

“I didn’t want to see you pull a sucker act like Julian.”

“Hasn’t Julian signed it?” I said.
“I’m washed up with that sap for good,” Sammy said. “He’s

hopeless. He doesn’t know to wipe himself.”

Nebbish, poor Julian, a hero with quaking knees and a stomach

full of butter ies.

butting against a stone wall,” Sammy said, “I think I can put you
onto a good thing. Julian was beginning to get too much dough to
work with me anyway. I need somebody in the lower brackets—to
balance what I’m getting. So, while I was getting my massage this
morning, it hit me like a ton of scripts. Why the hell don’t I get Al?
He needs a break and he’s just what I need. So you’re being
transferred to our unit tomorrow. We’re going to have a helluva
picture—we just got word this morning that we can get Gable from
Metro for the lead. It’ll mean an A credit right o  the bat. And, if
you click, I’m liable to let you in on something really big that I’m
not able to break yet.”

“It’s very nice of you to rearrange my life for me this way,” I said,

“but what about Masaryk?”

“Listen, my  ne-feathered frand,” he said, “between you and me

and Louella O. Parsons you’re just writing for the shelf. That anti-
fascist stu  hasn’t got a prayer. Why do you think Metro scrapped It
Can’t Happen Here? It’s lousy for the English market. A producer
who just got back told me that at lunch the other day. England
doesn’t want to get Hitler and Mussolini sore.”

He yanked his lapel-watch out of his breast pocket. “Jesus, I

better run—I’ve got a date with Frank, Frank Collier—to look at the
rushes on Monsoon. The stu  is coming through terri c. Keep in
touch with me, sweetheart.”

resignation blank. I studied the signature that Sammy had
complimented me on placing there. I had a crazy impulse to make
an airplane out of it and send it diving down into the studio street.
But instead I just folded it double and began to shred it into the
wastebasket.

I really felt sorry for Mr. Fineman when he had to call me in and tell
me I was being closed out. This was not his way. He felt guilty and

powerless. “I’m afraid Masaryk is going on the shelf for a while and
I haven’t got another assignment for you at the moment.”

have been super uous because the sympathy in his eyes, in his
handshake, said it for him.

All I ever ask of a writer is that he deliver, he was trying to tell

me. All I ask is that he loves to write motion pictures. That’s the
only kind of loyalty to the industry that means anything, and if that
kind of loyalty comes through his work, whether he spends his
nights in Main Street brothels or Writers Guild meetings is none of
my business.

“But I want you to know I liked your work, and I’d like to do a

picture with you some time. All the luck, Manheim.”

the studios, but everywhere he went he got the same answer: They
weren’t taking on new writers just now.

I sat by the phone like an extra boy hoping for that call from

Central Casting.

When it rang a voice started talking a mile a minute.
“Oh, you dumb son-of-a-bitch, you glutton for punishment, you

momser you.”

“Where the hell are you, in a pay phone? Where you don’t want

to waste time saying hello?”

and he tries to make jokes yet. Well, Al, I don’t know whether I’m
just getting soft or whether I’m queer for you. But I’m going to give
you one more chance.”

“I didn’t do it, mister, honest, don’t hit me again,” I said.
“Listen, Al,” he said, “I don’t see what you have to be so goddam

cheerful about. I kept telling you. But you wouldn’t listen to me.
You had to stick your neck out like a gira e. Now you really bitched
yourself up. But good. But I’ve got some in uence in this town now
and there may still be an outside chance of cleaning you up. Now
here’s what I want you to do. Larry Paine is having a little get-
together at his place tonight and I thought you might be doing
yourself a hell of a lot of good if you came …”

up to. And of course there was the old curiosity as to how this was
going to quicken the already mercurial pace of Mr. Glick.

me into the bar, where I found the Four Horsemen, Paine, Wilson,
McCarter and Glick, entertaining  fteen or twenty other writers. I
spotted Lorna Flint, the old silent star who was in the writing game
on a raincheck, George Pancake and my epic poet, Henry Powell
Turner.

After two or three drinks, the party turned out to be a meeting.
Lawrence Paine called us to order and congratulated us on being

the founding fathers of a new writers’ organization, the Association
of Photodramatists.

We, he informed us, were to have much the same aims as the

defunct Screen Writers Guild, except that we would be a more select
group, with a more discreet program.

Then Sammy nominated Paine as President, Jack McCarter

seconded it and Sammy announced that he had been unanimously
elected, although my right hand had stayed right in my pocket
where it belonged.

Pancake nominated Henry Powell Turner for Vice-President.

Turner rose, jowly and almost bald now, and I noticed how his
 ngers trembled as they reached to clutch the back of the seat in
front of him.

“I regret that it will not be practical for me to accept this o ce,”

he explained. “For I am quitting Hollywood for good, to devote
myself exclusively to poetry again, as soon as I  nish my present
assignment.”

So the Vice-President of the Association of Photodramatists turned

out to be Sammy Glick.

After Wilson and McCarter were honored with the remaining

o ces, we were all invited to sign up as charter members. Pancake
signed with a  ourish and handed me the pen.

“I thought you were opposed to writers’ organizations?” I said.
“This one is di erent,” he said righteously.

contract is buttered on.”

He looked down the list o ciously. “Where’s your name?” he

accused me.

“In my wallet,” I said.
“What the hell is the matter with you?” he said.
“I’ve just been through one war,” I said. “I don’t think I could take

another.”

“There’s not going to be any war,” he said. “I got it all  xed.”
“How about recognition?” I said. “The Guild’s been battling over

that for years.”

“That shows you how smart your Guild is,” he said. “We’re going

to be recognized right o  the bat. I got it straight from Dan Young.
What do you think of that?”

Young doing discussing the recognition of an organization that
hadn’t even been formed yet, much less elected spokesmen?”

“I thought it wouldn’t do any harm to sound him out on the idea,”

he said.

“Do whom any harm?” I said. “So you and Young decided that it

was wrong for the Guild with nine hundred members to represent
all the writers in Hollywood, but all right for your Photodramatists
with twenty members?”

explained. “They know they can trust us.”

“Oh,” I said.
He put his hand on my arm intimately.
“Come outside a moment, Al. I want to talk to you.”
We walked along the edge of the pool. Sammy’s tone was

conspiratorially important.

“You know I told you the other day I had something I wasn’t

ready to break yet? Well, it still hasn’t quite jelled, but there’s a
good chance I won’t be writing much longer. I’ll be on the hiring
end …”

Sammy paused to take a deep, proud draw on his cigar.

I wondered if this was the price of his sell-out tactics in the Guild.

If he became a writer by using Julian Blumberg as a stepping stone,
it seemed only  tting that he should become a supervisor by
climbing over hundreds of other writers.

All I could think of to say was, “I’ll be god-damned.”
“Shut up and listen,” he ordered. “If this thing goes through, I’m

thinking of keeping a writer with me all the time. You know,
someone who’s loyal to me. What’s the percentage in going down
with the Guild when you can waltz into a set-up like that? So why
not be smart for once and join an out t that’s strictly class?”

once.”

only trying to help you. But if you haven’t learned by this time that
it’s every man for himself, it’s no skin o  my ass. It’s your funeral.”

Association of Photodramatists, taking long brisk strides with his
head down as if he were bucking a sti  wind. It was the great-man
walk he was developing.

The next evening there was another little meeting in Hollywood. But
this gathering was small for another reason, it was not a beginning,
but an ending.

The Guild had called its members to a  nal reckoning. It wanted

to learn whether it was still in existence. A handful of us stood
around the door hopefully as the survivors straggled in. When the
meeting began the room was so empty that the President asked us
all to move up, so we wouldn’t look so desolate. It was a sad and
splendid little meeting full of the warmth and understanding toward
each other that people have to dig deep in themselves to tap, which
they only reveal when their farms have been washed away by  ood
or their homes blown o  the earth by bombs or when somebody
dies.

to. It was strange to see who the die-hards turned out to be. Some of
those who had been the most belligerent and loudest were gone. But
Bob Gri n was there, for some reason he would probably never be
able to explain even to himself. And Julian, a shade paler than
usual, faint from fright at his own courage, wanting nothing more
from life than that little yellow house with the surf splashing up
below it, martyring himself because he couldn’t learn how to run,
forward or backward.

Kit topped the evening o  with a little hail-and-farewell speech

that somehow managed to sound hard-boiled and idealistic at the
same time.

“In four hectic weeks we have seen our Guild murdered by a

small group of willful (for want of a better name) men with only
one allegiance—to themselves. Our President has asked me to
deliver the funeral oration but I’m afraid any elegy would be out of
place because I have a feeling that the corpse is going to be very
obstinate about being buried.”

Afterwards Kit, Julian and I adjourned to Barney’s Beanery to cry

into our beer. In one corner of the joint somebody was playing a
Louie Armstrong in a jukebox and in the other those two ex-
vaudeville headliners were singing familiar songs that everybody
has forgotten. And yet there was something nice and peaceful about
the place.

began to round out the picture of Sammy Glick, union member and
all-around Brother of Man.

“Yesterday when I went back to clean out my desk—by the way,

I’m no longer employed by World-Wide—I could hear Mr. Wilson
shouting at the top of his voice—you know he has the o ce next to
mine. Well, I couldn’t make out what he was saying, but I thought I
heard something about Sammy and it sounded interesting, so I used
a trick I learned in that mystery picture we did: I put an empty glass
against the wall and pressed my ear against it.

“Wilson was doing the worst cursing I ever heard. He was

screaming his head o  about the studio double-crossing him and

calling Sammy every dirty name under the sun. After a while I
began to get it. ‘Son-of-a-bitch-bastard!’ Wilson was howling, ‘For
ten years the one thing I want is to be a producer. I  gure the best
way to get my break is to lead the stampede out of the Guild like
the studio wants. And then, when it looks like I’m all set, a little jerk
who could be my son, God forbid, beats me to the punch!’ ”

there it was. We all got hysterical at Julian’s picture of Wilson
foaming at the mouth because Sammy had appropriated the fruits of
his treachery, but it would have been funnier if it hadn’t contained
so much horror, the horror of a foetus called Sammy Glick sprinting
out of his mother’s womb, turning life into a race in which the only
rules are  ght for the rail and elbow on the turns and the only  nish
line is death.

getting so a man isn’t even safe being a louse any more.”

“Sammy Glick Is Unfair to Organized Double-Crossers!”

The next day I got a call from my agent. “Hello,” he said. “How are
you at dishwashing or making paper  owers? Because I’m afraid
you’d better start looking for another trade.”

“Is it that bad?”
“Tough,” he said. “Very tough. Jesus, I didn’t know you were one

of the ringleaders of the Guild.”

“Neither did I,” I said. “So I’m really on the blacklist?”
“If there was a blacklist, I guess you’d be on it, all right,” he said.

“But they don’t need anything like that in this chummy little
business. All it takes is a couple of big shots happening to mention it
over a poker game—or meeting in Chasen’s and passing the word
along. That’s why you should have played ball.”

“I know,” I said. “I’ve been following the career of the greatest

ballplayer of them all.”

“What the hell are you talking about?” he said.

thinking I was back where I came from again, watching the kid run
for a high one in the old Stadium.

It was to be the last dinner before I caught the train for New York in
the morning.

“Where shall it be for dinner?” I said. “Let’s make it some place

special.”

“Oh, I think it’s only  tting that you pay your respects to the

Derby,” Kit said. “It’s the Hollywood version of the farewell visit to
the college chapel.”

We sat in the Derby watching the people watch each other.
“It’s a funny thing,” Kit said. “If you watch an animal while it

eats, it stops. But here in the Derby several hundred people pay and
pay well for the privilege.”

“And of watching everybody else,” I said.
Everybody turned to stare at the foreign star who had just come

in with her husband and her new lover. She walked between them
with a haughty pride, the way one does with Russian wolfhounds.

“Look at that poor bastard,” Kit said, pointing out the husband, a

big director in Europe who hadn’t been able to get a job here and
who seemed to be laughing gaily at something the lover had just
said.

“He knows everybody in the room read about his wife and that

other guy in Parsons’ column this morning, and he’s feeling just
terribly modern and Noel Coward.”

“And lousy,” I added.
I looked around the Derby, at the familiar faces, at the faces I had

never seen before but which looked familiar because they  tted so
well into the pattern, at the caricatures on the wall which seemed to
be unconsciously mocking them all.

Then I suddenly heard a familiar voice.
“Saw your picture, Dave. Tuhri c!”

aisle. No voice carried quite like Sammy’s. He had stopped at Dave
Roberts’s table, draping himself over it to embrace the famous
director.

“There he blows!” I said.
“Blows is right!” Kit answered.
“Tuhri c!” Sammy was exclaiming. “You made me cry. You

know what a tough audience I am and I swear to God when that
little kid comes home Christmas morning and  nds her doll broken,
you got me”—he indicated the general direction of his heart and
tapped it several times meaningfully—”here.”

his own table. Rita was waiting for him, and a tall, elegant
Englishman I had seen at the Larry Paine gathering, and a swarthy
young man in a dapper sti  white collar and  ashy suit.

“Who’s he with?” I said.
“The one who looks like a bodyguard is something Sammy just

dug up,” Kit said. “Called Sheik Dugan. Sammy seems to be
breaking him in as a high-class stooge. Out here they’re as necessary
a social prop as valets. The other one is Sir Anthony Abbott. Came
over with quite a fanfare about being the greatest writer in England.
So far the chief contribution he’s made to Hollywood seems to be a
 ve-goal rating for Zanuck’s polo team.”

“Remember that time you told me you knew a lot of Sammy

Glicks,” I said. “I thought you were crazy until I started thinking
about that gang at Paine’s the other night. They were all so di erent
—a titled Englishman and a famous poet and an aesthetic nance and
a tough, drunken ex-reporter—but they all really had the same idea
Sammy had. They were all running. Sammy was just a little bit
faster, that’s all.”

Kit nodded. “I wonder if the thing that makes Sammy so

fascinating for us is that he is the id of our whole society.”

“What do you mean?”
“Well, you know how the id is supposed to be the core of your

basic appetites which the superego dresses in the clothes of
respectability to present to the outside world? Somehow Sammy

never had time to get dressed up the way all those others have,
Wilson and McCarter and Sir Anthony, all their sammyglickness
covered up with Oxford manners or have-one-on-me sociability or
Christian morals that they pay their respects to every Sunday
morning when they don’t have too big a hangover. I think that’s
what  rst hit me about Sammy. He wasn’t something trying to be
something else. He was the thing itself, the id, out in the open. It
might not be very pretty but there it was.”

“So Sammy’s got id,” I said. “And that’s what keeps him running.”
“Oh, I doubt if it’s that easy,” she laughed. “To  nd out why

Sammy really runs so much faster than anyone else, you’d probably
have to know what kind of infancy he had, and whether his
kindergarten teacher used to slap him, and under what conditions
he learned the facts of life, whether he ever su ered from
malnutrition—the whole works.”

said. “Except for the little matter of  nding a job.”

Sammy had paid his check and was making an exit. He looked

over at us, waved  eetingly and ran.

I watched Sammy at the entrance, standing under the big

caricature of Franklin D., looking the place over as if he were about
to stick it up, while his man Sheik was helping him into his brown
suede overcoat. Then Sammy adjusted with casual care the green
Tyrolean hat that his face would never suit, Rita  oated out of the
ladies’ room and they were o .

“I wonder what shoes he’s wearing now,” I said. “Probably some

little number whipped up by his o cial cobbler, with laces of
human hair plucked from the heads of leading ladies.”

“He must have twenty pair,” she said. “What is that special yen

for shoes?”

“Maybe he’s trying to  nd a pair he can’t wear out in a day,” I

said. “If I solve the mystery in New York I’ll shoot a wire.”

We were on our porch watching the lights black out over Hollywood
again.

and about screen writing and about the revolt of the generals that
had just begun in Spain, but it wasn’t like any of the good talks we
had had before, because words that night could only be a buzzing of
irrelevance.

I kept noticing the wordless things, the casual, unladylike way she

leaned over the porch wall, not caring what the wind did with her
hair. The way the glow from the room behind us highlighted the
bony handsomeness of her face; how long we were conscious of the
closeness of our hands before they  nally met, and then how much
harder it was to talk.

saying this for the past two hours. God, I’ve wanted you a long time!
I guess you know how long, and I thought tonight …”

they weren’t being hard and I met the look, inquisitively, and she
turned away to stare out at the lights far below.

around. This is, well, maybe the best way of saying good-bye  …”
There was a pool of nausea in my stomach that suddenly became
anger. “After all, I’m not a Sammy Glick that hits and runs.”

I thought she was going to get sore because I was, but instead she

said, “Look, darling, I was never going to mention it again, but as
long as you have  …  With Sammy there could never be any
complications. You know how he is, monolithic, just tosses it o ,
never lets you get inside, no emotional entanglements to slow him
down. But you, you’re such a sentimental dope, you’d be calling me
long distance before you passed Kansas City, wanting to make an
honest woman of me.”

you.”

That was all it needed and her lips seemed to be there waiting

and I had a  ash of that  rst moment we danced together when she
had almost seemed to take the lead. It was the same struggle now,

the impulses controlled so long  nally pouring out in unexpected
violence, and then suddenly she relaxed. “Feminine as hell,” I could
remember her saying, and I could feel myself holding her, feel her
body accept my hands.

Then we were in the bedroom and I was fumbling impatiently

with her dress but she stopped me, saying, “Don’t, Al. Let me do it.
I’ll be right back.”

I didn’t understand then, but I did a minute later when she

returned, her body trim and cool and con dent.

she switched o  the main lights.

from the  rst moment both of us knew that was something we
would never have to worry about. It was the way she went at a
script, or fought for the Guild or played tennis.

Then she stretched to turn on the lamp near the bed.

“Hello,” I answered and we both smiled, our new, intimate smile.

She reached over and laid her hand on my shoulder a ectionately.
Sammy may go through every girl in Hollywood, I thought, but this
is another pleasure he will never know, the give-and-take
companionship, the overtones. Slip ’em a lay, I could hear him
saying. Sure, I get in three times a week, gratis.

We must have been lying there a long time, for the electric lights

had become part of the night before and the dawn was a pale blue
canopy over our window.

“Kit,” I said. “Maybe you were right. Maybe I would be calling

you by the time I reached Needles. So why don’t you save us both a
lot of time by coming along with me? We’ll get married when we
get in.”

She hesitated a long time, but I could tell she wasn’t thinking it

over, just trying to  nd the words to let me down easy.

“Al,” she said, “you could stay here and let me support you until

this thing blew over, but you’d be miserable. You wouldn’t feel you

had a place. That’s the way I’d feel if I left here now.”

“But God knows you could  nd plenty to do around New York.”
“Yes, but I’ve spent four years trying to be a screen writer and I’m

just beginning to learn how to be a good one. Now that Je erson is
clicking, I’m getting assignments that really give me a chance to do
something.”

there between us. “This is what I was afraid of,” she said. “Starting
something we can’t  nish. I thought you’d understand.”

to trail me around and wait for me to come home for supper—I
suppose that wouldn’t be you any more.”

She clasped her hands in back of her head thoughtfully.
“I’m going to miss you,” she said.

I sat there in the diner looking out at the pink-brown desert and
 nishing my co ee in peace when the steward handed me a Los
Angeles paper.

I had caught the Hollywood habit of opening it straight to the  lm

section. Sammy’s picture was in the lead column, denying the rumor
that he and Rita Royce were secretly married. “I respect Miss Royce
tremendously,” Sammy was quoted, “and we seem to have a great
many mutual interests, such as the new play I’m writing for her.”
The words read like an old refrain: “But we’re just good friends,
very good friends.”

And then I came to what Sammy would call the topperoo.
Mr. Glick, the column cooed, is the young miracle man who has

just signed a writer-producer contract with World-Wide. “Last night
on the phone he would only laugh modestly when I asked him to
con rm my tip-o  from reliable inside sources that this new
contract will begin at $2000 a week.”

I could just imagine that modest laughter. Sammy could only have

one kind of laugh for $2000 a week and I was glad I didn’t have to
be around to hear it.

two thousand dollars a week had only been a terrible passion
sizzling in his belly and it was consoling just to lean back and let the
distance between us widen tie by tie. I listened to the sound of the
wheels carrying on their endless conversation with the tracks. At
 rst their rapid chatter sounded like nothing but metallic and
monotonous double-talk. But later, as my ear became accustomed to
their language, I realized that they were asking each other, over and
over again, What Makes Sammy Run? What makes Sammy run what
makes sammy run what makes sammy runwhatmakessammyrun …

OceanofPDF.com

It may sound like sour grapes but it was good to get Hollywood and
Sammy Glick behind me. The  rst day I hit New York I must have
walked a couple of hundred blocks. It felt great even though I was
broke and New York can be a lonely and ugly town for the guys
without money. But I ran into some of the old gang right away, guys
who were nicer to you when you needed it than when you didn’t,
and pretty soon I was back in the old groove, pounding it out for the
Record again, beginning to work Hollywood out of my system.

I mean I was able to look at a guy without wondering whether he

was a  ve- or a seventy- ve-hundred man, and I could sit back in a
movie and enjoy my  fty- ve-cent dream without torturing myself
with the knowledge that the best scene in the picture had gone the
way of all censors or that the writing which was credited to a
famous Broadway playwright because he had a sole screenplay
credit clause in his contract was really the work of half a dozen busy
little B-writers.

But best of all I congratulated myself on getting Sammy Glick out

of my life, or rather, getting myself out of his. Once in a while I
couldn’t help reading about him, of course; one of the fan mags
would name him on its list of Hollywood’s Ten Most Eligible
Bachelors, or he was o  to Hawaii for a much-needed rest, and I
caught myself searching for his name in the columns from time to
time, but on the whole I was able to conduct my life as if he had
never been a part of it, settling down with the comforting thought
that he would never be again.

This thought persisted for almost four weeks. Then one night

some of us were sitting around the o ce a tri e on the alcohol side
and the conversation took a sudden turn for Sammy Glick. One of
the boys had just seen a picture of his, Touchdown, Irish! a drama of

Notre Dame’s Four Horsemen, with exactly the same plot as Hold
’em, Yale! Sammy’s football picture of the season before, and of
course we began to swap anecdotes of his days on the Record, all
told with a sense of indignation, humor and envy. And then we got
to arguing, God knows why, about where he came from. There were
votes for the Bronx and Washington Heights and the Lower East
Side and the usual bets were made. We wondered how we could
settle it, and then I had a brainstorm. Didn’t we used to keep a  le
on all our employees?

desk, “Hey, Oz, don’t we keep some sort of  le on all the guys that
work here?” and Osborne wasn’t sure, he had only been on the
Record a couple centuries, and I could hear the question running
through the room, “Hey, Jack, we got a personnel  ling system in
the joint?” and Jack saying he had heard of something like that, but
he wouldn’t know where it was.

guided me to a remote part of the building where I was left to
continue my quest for Sammy Glick. For this was part of the quest,
though I was in no condition to realize it then as I thumbed foggily
through the yellowing cards, thinking I was just ending a pointless,
drunken argument when I was really stumbling onto the terrible
mysteries of the child Sammy.

The cards shu ed slowly through my  ngers, Gang, Gi ord,

Glennon, and then I reached Golden and wondered how I had
missed Glick so I went back more slowly and then I discovered why.
I had hardly been reading the names, mostly searching for that one
quick syllable and the cards went Glennon, Glessner, Glickstein,
only this time it registered and I yanked the card out, vaguely
annoyed with myself at the excitement that came with it.

NAME…….SAMUEL GLICKSTEIN

OCCUPATION…….Copy Boy

ADDRESS…….136 Rivington St

LAST OCCUPATION …….Western Union messenger

PHONE…….none

AGE…….17

HT…….5’7”

WEIGHT…….126 lbs.

PARENTS’ NAME…….Mrs. Max Glickstein

ADDRESS…….Same as above

I wondered when he had dropped that “stein” from around his

neck. Something that Sammy once said about his father came back
to me and I wondered what had happened to Max. I thought, just
for the hell of it, of copying o  the card, but that was too much
trouble so I just slipped it into my pocket.

It seems to be a human failing to accumulate a great many things in
our pockets, all of them absolutely useless, but which we transfer
conscientiously from suit to suit. That is how I happened to reach
into my pocket the following Sunday and  nd the card still with me.
Now, psychologists may say that I purposely brought the card with
me that Sunday because of a subconscious determination to trace
Sammy back to his roots. And the psychologists may even be right.
It is very hard to say. All I know is that when I went strolling
through Central Park that morning my only conscious purpose was
to watch the ducks and feed the pigeons and get a little air, and that
it was a genuine surprise to  nd SAMUEL GLICK-STEIN, Copy Boy, 17, in my
hand when I reached for a cigarette. And when I turned casually out
of the park and began strolling down Fifth Avenue, it was without
the slightest knowledge of where I was heading.

But by the time I had walked down to 38th Street I was beginning

to suspect. I thought of that scrapbook I had started. It was like
putting a jigsaw puzzle together and some of the pieces were still
missing. I was down to 34th Street, my mind trailing a ghost, the
swift, fresh phantom of a pasty-faced copy boy, my body following
foolishly after my mind.

Half an hour later I was walking into the world of his childhood, a

foreign world of clotheslines,  retraps, pushcarts and pinch-faced
children that stretches for too many blocks along the East River. I
walked down Avenue A, down Allen, down Rivington, wondering at
the irony of the fascist charge that the Jews have cornered the
wealth of America; for here where there are more Jews than
anywhere else in the world, millions of them are crowded into these
ghetto streets with the early American names.

The Glicksteins lived between a synagogue and a  sh store, in a

tenement laced with corroded  re escapes and sagging wash-lines. It
looked as if one healthy gust of wind would send its tired bricks
tumbling down into the narrow street. The hallway gave o  a warm,
sweet and in nitely unpleasant odor of age, of decay, of too many
uncleaned kitchens too close together. I found the name Glickstein
on the mailbox, pressed the buzzer for 4C and started up the moldy
wooden staircase that groaned protestingly as I climbed to the top
 oor.

door as far as the safety-latch would permit. He looked suspiciously
at me through the crack.

“Yes?”
Suddenly I was overwhelmed with the ridiculousness of this visit.

I had an impulse to turn and hurry o . But it was too late. I had
already begun to explain who I was, why I had come. As if I knew,
as if I could.

Sammy Glick’s from Hollywood.”

open up the door!”

was closed, so she could not have been sitting there for the air. After
all these years she must have been still curious about what was
going on down there in the street. The indoor complexion of her
emaciated, wrinkled face was emphasized by the black lace shawl
which she wore, peasant-fashion, over her head. My appearance

seemed to frighten her, for she hurried over to me, looking up into
my face with an anxiety that made me uncomfortable.

him! Tell me, mister, please. He sent you to tell me, maybe?”

walk into this. “There’s nothing wrong with Sammy, absolutely
nothing, he’s getting along  ne.”

“Please, I’m his momma—so if something’s wrong with my

Sammele I want I should know.”

why I came. Sammy couldn’t be better.”

“Ach,” she sighed, slowly regaining her composure. “Excuse me,

please. When I hear you come from Sammele I get so excited …”

“We haven’t heard from Sammy in so long that Momma’s been

worried about him,” the sallow-faced Israel explained.

“But Sammele’s a good boy,” Mrs. Glickstein added hastily.

“Every month regular comes his check in the mail. Only he is all the
time so busy he never has time for writing.”

She looked at me and her face creased into the deeper wrinkles of

a smile. “So maybe my son sent you, you should tell me something
from him?”

Here I go again, I thought. Sammy’s trusted friend bringing the

message of devotion from the faithful son. Why do I always have to
be defending the bastard?

myself saying. “He said that even if he hasn’t much time to write he
wants you to know he is always thinking of you.”

In her excitement she had forgotten her customary hospitality.
“This is his brother,” she said. “Israel.” Israel nodded like an aged

Jew in prayer. He was like an old, bent man with a young face.
“Izzy, go in the kitchen and make some tea, like a good boy.”

physical similarity had anything to do with resemblance, he and
Sammy would have looked very much alike. But I would never have
recognized them as brothers, for Israel’s face seemed to re ect
despair and bitterness and the gentleness of resignation, and it was

strange to see how these qualities had molded his face to one so
di erent from the forward thrust of Sammy’s.

warm, sticky smell I had noticed in the hallway downstairs was only
the faint essence of the odor that hung over this  at, the smell of
rotting woodwork and too much living in one place.

The street below vibrated with the harsh, raw noises of kids

yelling at each other in a stoop-ball game, merchants driving their
hard bargains, women shouting their gossip from stoop to stoop,
radios turned up as loud as possible to drown each other out,
automobile horns honk-honking to remind everybody that their
marketplace, their playground, their social center, their arena, was
still a street.

guessed what I was thinking.

is better here with the synagogue right next door, so I don’t have to
do no walking, and the Settlement House where Izzy works right
around the corner, and everybody on the block I am such good
friends with like in the old country.”

and yellow bread. Mrs. Glickstein and Israel poured their tea into
saucers and sucked it through the cubes of sugar they held between
their teeth.

group photograph captioned Lower Grades, P.S. 15. “See if you can
tell which one is him?” Mrs. Glickstein challenged me playfully.

I looked across the rows of serious little faces, wondering whether

I could pick him out. It was a cinch. My  nger went right to him. He
was on the left end of the  rst row, standing a little closer to the
camera than anybody else. It looked weird to see that same intense
ferret face on this little body in short pants and long black stockings
wrinkled over the knees. “That’s him,” I said.

“And also here,” Mrs. Glickstein said mischievously, pointing to

the opposite side of the same row. I looked more closely. By God,
there he was again, only this time his face was distorted in a big

grin. “He ran around behind the bleachers so he should beat the
camera,” Mrs. Glickstein explained.

I studied this second image. I had seen that same exultant look on

his face before. The moment he watched his name  ash on the
screen for the  rst time, the night of his dramatic triumph when the
 ashlights  ared around him and Rita Royce. His face told you that
this was a triumph too. When the picture was posted on the school
bulletin board Sammy’s achievement must have monopolized the
comment, and the triumphant sneer on that dark little puss revealed
that this had already become his goal.

and whether he was any taller and if he were a good boy and had he
met any nice Jewish girls. And she went on talking about what a
 ne baby he had been and what a smart, hardworking boy, distilling
the story of his youth with the unconscious censorship of a mother’s
pride. In English she sounded awkward and ignorant, but when she
discovered I understood Yiddish (though I had practically forgotten
how to speak it) she became articulate with that mysterious sense of
poetry all peasants seem to have.

All the time we talked, Israel sat there hardly saying a word,

noisily sipping his tea or chewing on the dry bread. But the twisted
way he smiled at his mother’s naive account of her little Sammele,
an occasional comment he could not resist, gave him away. When
Mrs. Glickstein boasted of the regularity with which Sammy’s check
arrived every week, Israel nodded scornfully, mumbled grimly,
“Sure, sure, he’s very thoughtful.” I watched him more and more as
Mrs. Glickstein talked, wondering how long this hate for Sammy
had been fermenting. He was the one to talk, I thought, this was my
man.

voices in weird cacophony. The Orthodox Jews were beginning their
evening prayers in the synagogue next door. Israel rose to join them.
I said I would like to come along. He nodded,  ustered and pleased.

after her little boy, and pressed a paper bag into my hand. “Strudel,”

she said, “still hot. I made it today. Sammele used to say I made the
best strudel in the whole world.”

“And maybe you will tell him some time he should try to come
home and see his Momma.”

wondering how many other cruelties of Sammy’s she had accepted
with the same mild protest.

The synagogue was a bare, shabby place, airless with all the
windows shut, where forty or  fty men, mostly aged and bearded,
faced east to the Holy Land, humbled themselves before their  erce,
demanding God and wailed their songs of endless sorrow. I stood
there swaying with them, but only mechanically, for I was raised in
the Reform Temple that these traditional religionists would spit
upon, and in recent years I had even strayed from this watered-
down Judaism, occasionally doing lip service on the High Holy Days
now but coming to believe that if love for your fellow man is in
your heart you need no superstructure to dramatize it for you. And
if it isn’t, no God and no church can put it there. So I stood there
swaying and wondering. What is a Jew? The anthropologists have
proved it is not a race, since the only scienti c category is the
Semitic, which includes Arabians and Assyrians, some of the most
fervent anti-Jews in the world. And if it were merely a religion, all
Jews like me would have to be excluded. And if it is only a unit of
national culture, it is withering away in America, for the customs
and traditions that the Glicksteins brought over at the end of the
nineteenth century may have been inherited by Israel, droning in his
yarmulka at my side, but were thrown overboard as excess baggage
by anyone in such a hurry as his younger brother.

Afterward we went across to a little bakery, because that was the
most convenient place to sit, and ate potato knishes and talked.

worked for the Settlement House  fteen years. When he was a child
he had developed tuberculosis of the skin, and doctors had been
telling him to  nd a better climate, but something held him here,
like an umbilical cord between him and his people, which he would
not cut.

them. I would worry about them.”

He talked without an accent but with the wailing tone and

cadence of the Jewish chants.

“How much can the Settlement do?” I said.
He nodded wearily. “I know. Sometimes I feel like I’m trying to

bail out the Hudson with my bare hands.” The singsong of his voice
emphasized the futility. “This one has no clothes to go to school. So,
when you get the clothes, he can’t go to school because the father
has no job. So, when you  nd the job …”

Reds say to me, ‘What is the use of your Settlement? It is just a
patch on the old tire. What we need is to throw the old tire on the
dump heap and start with a new one.’ I don’t know, sometimes I
think maybe they are not so crazy. Only more violence? I have seen
too much already. And meantime who is going to get the milk for
Mrs. Fleischman’s baby, or  nd someone to take care of little Irving
whose mother died yesterday …?”

He stopped short, swamped with the hopelessness of it.
“Israel,” I said, “have you always felt this way about it?”
“I guess I got it from the old man,” he said. “If he had lived a long

time ago they would have written about him in the Bible.
Everybody on the East Side called him Papa Glick. I can remember
when I was a kid, Papa was always bringing somebody hungry
home for supper, even when we didn’t have enough to go round. I
remember once he even dragged an Irish bum in o  the Bowery for
the Passover feast, and the ceremony made the mick bawl.
Whenever anything went wrong, the neighbors always yelled for

Papa. They even called him in the middle of the night like a doctor.
Poor Papa Glick.”

“Where is he now?”
“He’s been dead since Sammy was thirteen.”
“How did he die, Israel?”
“He was run over. Coming home with his pushcart one night.

Poor Papa. It was like he really wanted to get run over.”

“Why?” I said. “What was the matter, Israel?”
“What is the use?” he said. “What’s passed is passed. So now that

my brother is a big man I would only sound jealous.”

“But you really wouldn’t want to be Sammy?”
“Me be Sammy!” he said. “May I eat a live pig  rst.”
“How was it with him and your father?” I said. “What kind of a

kid was he? You can tell me.”

to understand.

Israel was one of those Jews who cannot look angry. When they

want to look angry they only look more melancholy.

any more.”

“What happened?” I said. “What did he do?”
“It’s a long story,” Israel said. “I know it’s a terrible thing to say

about your own  esh and blood, but, before God, if he should drop
dead this minute I would not even sit shiva.”

looked like hobgoblins playing around the lampposts and I had
heard Israel’s story. It was a sad, angry story, full of tears and curses
and, as I walked slowly toward the subway through those jumbled
ghetto streets, it made me shudder to pass all those little creatures
who might be Sammy Glicks.

Israel’s story was just fascinating and unsatisfying enough to make

me want to go on playing Sherlock Holmes, only this seemed more
important than tracking down a murderer. And there were still large
gaps to be  lled. But Israel had given me some promising leads. He
had told me about Sammy’s  rst teacher, Miss Carr, who was still at
P.S. 15. And about Foxy Four Eyes, the degenerate son of a tailor,

always the idol of the younger boys who used to hang out at his old
man’s shop on the corner.

yard of Sammy’s school. The boys had gathered to watch a  ght.
“Kill the dirty sheeny,” they were yelling, “Kick him in the balls.”
Send him back to Palestine, to Ireland, to the Pope. Blazing with
hatreds so quickly inherited, it was easy to make the mistake of
thinking they were in the blood.

They fought grimly, weaving, jabbing, dancing away. They clinched,
pounded each other’s kidneys, broke, and punched with perfect
timing. These were not children but seasoned battlers, battle-scarred
veterans of seven or eight, for the East Side is like one gigantic
prize-ring through the ropes of which everyone has to climb at
birth.

had not been on this earth more than half a dozen years was
conscientiously inscribing the usual obscenity in chalk letters, a foot
high, which stood there like a desperate challenge to a hostile
world, summing up in two brief words the attitude toward life that
Sammy had probably begun to learn at the same age and place.

I really hadn’t expected to  nd her, but Miss Carr was still there.

Middle-aged, wiry, talkative and not as nervous as you would expect
her to be after struggling for control of those hostile, overcrowded
classes for so many years.

As she talked on, memory of Sammy sharpened, reminiscences of

him she thought she had forgotten began to return, and she passed
them on willingly, partly because she took special pride in her
memory, partly because Sammy’s childhood exploits still had a
fascination for her.

school. After she told me, I knew I would never forget it either. And
I knew that even if Sammy had forgotten it, it had become a part of
him.

As I was leaving, Miss Carr said, “So now he’s a famous movie

writer. I used to think Sammy might become a brilliant scholar. But

as he got up in the higher grades he began to lose interest. That’s
our problem down here, you know. I’m afraid P.S. 15 is the smallest
part of their education. The street is the real school. And that’s
where Sammy was a star pupil.” She took o  her glasses and began
to clean them carefully and I suddenly saw how old and tired she
was. “But I guess there’s nothing we can do about it. Sometimes I sit
here looking out that window and feel so hopeless—the things they
learn out there in the street.”

classroom where Sammy received a liberal education. It was still
there too. The old tailor had died and the shop had been handed
down to Foxy Four Eyes, whose shifty, crossed eyes leered out at
you through lenses half an inch thick. He was chinless and pu y-
cheeked and when he started to talk he exhibited a mouth full of
bad teeth and a vocabulary that made Sammy sound like the
Archbishop of Canterbury. The walls of the little shop were
decorated with intimate pictures of female anatomy cut out of Film
Funs and Police Gazettes with loving care.

up if I were ever down this way.”

hot-shot, that Sammy! I always said he’d sock the jackpot, but I sure
never thought he’d get his in the movies.” His laugh was shrill and
indecent. “Boy, I’ll never forget the time …”

I left Rivington Street behind, but not the smell of Rivington Street,
not the noise, not the faces. Not Sammy Glick running through
Rivington Street. For days after that wherever I was, whatever I was
doing, it kept coming back to me. I saw the Dead End Kids in a
movie. Oh, hell, I thought, compared to Sammy these are nothing
but a bunch of Honor Scouts. Their speech may be a tri e more
colorful, but they aren’t really evil, not the way I know childhood
can be evil now. Oh, the beautiful American dream of childhood,
barefoot boys with feet of tan, playing pirate, swimming holes,

bullfrogs in quiet ponds and Sunday hats, puppy loves, schooldays,
dear old golden rule days, my bashful beau, my ring-around-rosie
queen in calico, Tom Sawyer and Penrod and Andy Hardy with
America’s No. 1 Star, Mickey Rooney, don’t miss that heartwarming
picture of family life coming to your neighborhood theater on
Rivington Street, a sole screenplay credit, by Sammy Glick.

Where was the childhood of Sammy Glick? Step right up, ladies

and gentlemen, and see the man who was never young. It was
 ashing through my mind like a montage nightmare, Sammy’s face
looming up behind all those quick and terrible scenes of his
unchildhood:

Max Glickstein was a diamond cutter in the old country, proud of his

trade and his religion. After the pogrom that took his  rst-born, Max
brought his wife and other son to America. The child died in mid-ocean.
“We must be brave, Momma,” Max tried to console her. “Maybe God is
trying to tell us that we will carry none of the troubles of the old world
into the new. We will have new sons, little Americans. In America we
will  nd a new happiness and peace.”

They found Rivington Street. But no diamonds to cut. In time, Max got

a job cutting glass at ten dollars a week. “Glass,” he complained. “Glass
any jackass can cut. But diamonds!”

For years he cut glass every day but Saturday, when he worshipped his

God, and Sunday, when the Christians worshipped theirs. And his wife
bore him two sons,  rst Israel and  ve years later Shmelka. The midwife
did not think Shmelka would live. He weighed only  ve and a half
pounds. “Nebbish such a little one,” said the midwife. “Were he a little
kitten we would drown him already.” But survival of the  ttest is a more
complex process with thinking animals. Even one who thought as simply
as Mama Glickstein. She pushed her great breasts into his mouth until he
choked, hollered, and began to live.

Because he was puny, Mama spent so much time with him that his

growth was precocious. He walked before his  rst birthday. Talked
before his second. When he was three and a half, he changed his own
name. One of Israel’s friends always teased him with “Whadya say yer

name is, Smell ya?” One day Mama called, “Shmelka, come here,” and
he paid no attention. She called his name again.

“Shmelka isn’t my name any more,” he said.
“No,” Mama said, “then what is it, please?”
“Sammy,” he said.
Sammy was the name of an older kid across the hall whose mother

was always yelling for him.

twelve- fty. 
Papa 
was 
a 
foreman 
now, 
making 
sixteen, 
but 
he

remembered how it was to live on ten dollars a week. And now it was
even worse with the war boom started and prices rising. He walked out
with his men.

“Mr. Glickstein, don’t be a dope,” the owner said. “In another two,

three years you will becoming maybe a partner. To cut your own throat,
that is not human. And what kind of foolishness is this when I can get
plenty immigrants” (the owner having been here twenty years could look
down on the aliens) “to take their places?”

Papa Glick’s voice was deep and sure as if he were reading from the

Torah. “To be a partner in a sweatshop, such honors I can do without.”

But the owner was right about one thing. There were too many others.

The strike dragged on six months—a year  …  They never saw those jobs
again.

them. And he picked up a few pennies as the cantor in shul on Saturday.
But he would gladly have served for nothing and often had. There in the
synagogue, a dignitary with his impressive shawl, his yarmulka and his
great beard, there life was rich and beautiful. The rest were just the
necessary motions to keep alive.

And this they barely did. Sammy played in the streets without shoes.

For his  fth birthday he was given a pair that Israel had outgrown. But
they were still several sizes too large for him, and the way they  apped
like a clown’s made the other kids laugh. Sometimes when Sammy would
run after his tormentors the shoes would  y o , and Sammy would pick
them up in a rage and hurl them at his nearest enemy.

was too old. America was a land for young men. Finally he got himself a

pushcart like all the others. He sold shirts, neckties and socks, nothing
over twenty- ve cents. But there were too many pushcarts and not
enough customers. So Sammy started peddling papers. He was three feet,
four inches high. He wanted to play. He couldn’t see why Israel shouldn’t
do it instead. But soon Israel was going to be bar mitzvah. After school
let out at three o’clock he studied in the cheder until suppertime. Papa
was so proud of him. The melamed had told him Israel had the makings
of a real Talmudic scholar. And it was well known that the melamed
was a man who never had a good word to say for anyone but God. “God
has blessed my son with the heart and brains of a rabbi,” Papa boasted.

Sammy lugged his papers up and down Fourteenth Street yelling about

a war in Europe. He used to come home with a hoarse throat and thirty
or forty cents in pennies. He would count the money and say, “God
dammit, I’m yellin’ my brains out for nuttin.”

Papa Glick would look up from his prayer book. “Please, in this house

we do not bring such language.”

me—he says I wouldn’ hafta peddle papers if you wasn’t such a dope
and quit your job. He says his ol’ man tol’ him.”

“Silence,” said Papa Glick.
“He says that strike screwed us up good,” said Sammy.
Papa Glick’s hand clapped against Sammy’s cheek. It left a red imprint

on his white skin but he made no sound. By the time he was six he had
learned how to be sullen.

“Papa, please,” Mrs. Glickstein pleaded. “He’s so small, how should he

know what he’s saying—he hears it on the street.”

“That’s so he should forget what he hears,” said Papa.
Several weeks later Sammy came in with a dollar seventy-eight. Papa,

Momma and Israel danced around him.

“Sammy, you sold out all the papers?” said Papa in amazement.
“Yeah,” Sammy said. “There’s a guy on the opposite corner doin’

pretty good ’cause he’s yellin’ ‘U.S. may enter war.’ So I asks a customer
if there’s anything in the paper about that. So when he says no, I  gure I
can pull a fast one too. So I starts hollerin ’ ‘U.S. enters war,’ and jeez
you shoulda seen the rush!”

“But that was a lie,” Papa Glick said. “To sell papers like that is no

better than stealing.”

up?”

Sammy worked a year before he entered school.
That  rst day at P.S. 15, Sheik kept staring at him. He wanted to

listen to what Miss Carr was saying, but he couldn’t concentrate very
well because the Sheik’s small black eyes kept boring into him. Everybody
knew the Sheik. His old lady was Italian and his old man was Irish and
the neighbors would always hear them  ghting at night over who was the
better Catholic. The Sheik was older than anybody else in the class
because he had been left back a couple of times. The kids didn’t call him
the Sheik because he was handsome, but because it was whispered
around that he already knew what to do with little girls. There was even
a story that he had knocked one up already, but this was probably
circulated by Sheik himself who was a notorious boaster and had a habit
of appropriating all his big brother’s achievements.

The Sheik sat there all through the hour actively hating Sammy.

Sammy had taken his seat, the seat he had had for the past two years.
He had told Sammy, but Sammy had refused to budge.

“O.K., yuh dirty kike,” Sheik whispered harshly through his teeth. “See

yuh afta class.”

It was lunch hour. Some of the kids were getting up a game of ball.

Sammy wanted to play. After school there was cheder. And then papers
to sell. Sammy was going to be a ballplayer when he grew up. He had a
good eye and he was fast. But now he had to  ght Sheik. Sheik was two
years older, half a head taller. Sammy appraised him. He would
probably get the bejesus kicked out of him. But he wasn’t scared. Just
sorry he couldn’t get into that ball game. He followed Sheik into a vacant
lot across the street, all boarded up and full of old tin cans and whatever
anybody had ever felt like throwing there.

As soon as they got inside the Sheik let one go. It cracked against

Sammy’s nose, and blood spurted. Sammy’s nose felt bigger than his
whole face and he couldn’t see, but he moved in swinging. Sheik caught
him on the nose again. Sammy went down with Sheik on top of him,
kicking and swinging, spitting into the bloody face under him, his whole

body quivering in a frenzy of hate, shrieking until it became a chant,
“You killed Christ. You killed Christ”

went to eat his lunch. Sammy tried to stay there until he stopped
bleeding, but it wouldn’t stop, so he had to walk back to the schoolyard
that way. Miss Can ran over and dragged him into the ladies’ room.
While she washed o  the blood he stood there terribly white and terribly
silent. No tears. Just his mouth set hard and his eyes ugly.

“I think your nose is broken,” she said.
“It don’t hurt much,” said Sammy.
“You’d better come into the o ce and lie down.”
“Jeez, look where I am! The guys better not see me in the girls’ can.”
She didn’t know how to treat him. She was new here and she had

never seen kids like this before. If he would only cry she could comfort
him like an injured child. But he would not let her.

“Hey, what the hell’s the matter with that guy sayin I killed Christ?

The dirty bastard.”

“You must not talk like that,” said Miss Carr. “Christ died so that

everyone should forgive each other and live in brotherly love.”

“Yeah?” said Sammy. “How about Sheik? Don’t he believe in Christ?”
“Well, yes,” said Miss Carr, “but…”
“I gotta sit down,” said Sammy, “my head’s spinnin.”
Miss Carr tried to put her arms around him but he drew away. He was

like a little injured animal snarling at the hand that is trying to help it.

“You won’t have to worry from now on,” she said. “I’m going to have

a talk with Sheik. And I think I’ll ask some of the bigger boys to look
after you.”

His voice made her sympathy sound patronizing. “Who ast ya to? I’m

no sissy. I c’n take care-a myself.”

Sheik felt called upon to avenge Christ every day. Sammy accepted his

beatings as part of the school routine. He never tried to avoid them, to
sneak o  after school. He just absorbed it with the terrible calm of a
sparring partner. He would come home every night with his eyes swollen
or his lip cut and his mother would hold him in her arms and cry,
Sammele, Sammele, but he never cried with her, only held himself sti  in
her arms, a stranger to her.

After a while, there was no satisfaction left in it for Sheik any more. It

had become manual labor, slaughterhouse work. Sheik began to look
around for more responsive victims. It even left Sheik with a strange kind
of fear for Sammy. Somewhere along the line it had become the victim’s
triumph. Sammy would talk back to Sheik any time he liked. There was
nothing Sheik could do but beat him up again. All the su ering that
Sammy had swallowed instead of crying out had formed a hard cold ball
of novocaine in the pit of his stomach that deadened all his nerves.

poverty possessed him, but in a di erent way from Israel. He was always
on the lookout to make a dollar. The way the little Christians put on
Jewish hats and mingled with the Jewish boys to get free hand-outs in the
synagogue on the holy days gave him an idea. On Saturday he went
down to the Missions on the Bowery and let the Christ-spouters convert
him. At two bits a conversion. He came home rich with seventy- ve cents
jingling in his pockets. His father, struggling to maintain his last shred of
authority, the patriarchy of his own home, demanded to know why he
was not at cheder. Sammy hated cheder. Three hours a day in a
stinking back room with a sour-faced old Reb who taught you a lot of
crap about the Mosaic laws. You don’t go to jail if you break the laws of
Moses. Only if you got no money and get caught stealing, or don’t pay
your rent.

“I hadda chance to make a dollar,” Sammy said.
“Sammy!” his father bellowed. “Touching money on the Sabbath! God

should strike you dead!”

The old man snatched the money and  ung it down the stairs.
Sammy glared at his father the way he had at Sheik, the way he was

beginning to glare at the world.

“You big dope!” Sammy screamed at him, his voice shrill with rage.

“You lazy son-of-a-bitch.”

The old man did not respond. His eyes were closed and his lips were

moving. He looked as if he had had a stroke. He was praying.

Sammy went down and searched for the money until he found it.
His mother came down and sat on the stairs above him. She could

never scold Sammy. She was sorry for Papa but she was sorry for
Sammy too. She understood. Here in America life moves too fast for the

Jews. There is not time enough to pray and survive. The old laws like not
touching money or riding on the Sabbath—it was hard to make them
work. Israel might try to live by them but never Sammy. Sammy
frightened her. In the old country there may have been Jews who were
thieves or tightwads and rich Jews who would not talk to poor ones, but
she had never seen one like Sammy. Sammy was not a real Jew any
more. He was no di erent from the little wops and micks who cursed and
fought and cheated. Sometimes she could not believe he grew out of her
belly. He grew out of the belly of Rivington Street.

When Papa Glick found out how Sammy made his seventy- ve cents,

he went to shul four times a day instead of twice. He cried for God to
save Sammy.

nested in his childish fancy. When he was still in his cradle he could hear
the creaking of bedsprings and his parents’ loud breathing in the same
room. Cramped quarters forced sex into the open. When Sammy ran to
 nd a place to hide from the Jew-hunting gangs with rock- lled stockings
who roamed the streets on Hallowe’en, he bumped into a couple locked
together in the shadow of the tunnel-like corridor behind the stairs. On
sticky summer nights he used to trip over their legs as he raced across the
roofs. The  rst day in the street he learned about the painted women
who called out intimate names to men they didn’t know. When he was
ten he used to turn out the light to watch the lady across the court get
undressed. She was fat, and when she let her great  abby breasts ooze
out of her brassiere they  opped down like hams as she bent over.
Curiosity and then desire began to creep into Sammy’s wiry, undeveloped
loins.

her the quarter he had been given to buy groceries, but she just looked
down at him, put her hands on her hips, and laughed.

“Send your old man around, sonny, you’d fall in.”
A couple of days later Sammy was hanging around Foxy’s shop when

Shirley Stebbins came in. Shirley was several years older than any of
them, maybe sixteen or seventeen. She was tall and thin and only needed
a little more  esh to have a voluptuous  gure. People said her family was
having a tough time because she was going to high school when she

should be working. She wasn’t hard the way the other girls were hard,
boisterous and suggestive. Everybody on the block called her Sourpuss
because her mouth was always set in a sullen expression of contempt.
Foxy Four Eyes had advanced the theory that she was frigid. He said it
happened when her father climbed into her bed one night when his wife
was in the hospital.

“Foxy, I’m in a jam,” she said. “I need ten dollars bad.”
“Bad, huh?” he said, managing to give it an o -color in ection as he

put his hand on her. “A guy can do an awful lot with ten dollars.”

Eddie who was  fteen and knew his way around got it  rst.

“I’ll get in for a buck,” he said.
The expression on his face left no doubt about the pun. It had started

as a gag, but Foxy egged them on until the nine of them had subscribed
six dollars. Foxy’s cheeks burned with excitement and his cockeyes
looked out at his proteges proudly.

“All right, sister, I’ll be a sport, ” he said. “I’ll throw in the other four

—just to see ya oblige the boys.”

She looked at all of them. They were jumping around her like frantic

little gnomes. Sammy hardly reached her shoulder.

“All right,” she said in a tired voice. “Let’s see the money, you cheap

bastards.”

sprawled across her,  dgeting foolishly. Foxy Four Eyes could hardly
talk, he was laughing so hard. “Hey, fellers, lookit Sammy tryin’ to get
his  rst nookey!”

Sammy could feel the blood  ushing his head, and her silent contempt,

and his panicky impotence.

While he still clung to her ludicrously, she half-rose on her elbows and

said, “Somebody pull this  ea o  me. I’m not going to make this my life’s
work.”

Foxy and Eddie laughingly dragged him o , still struggling for her, like

a little puppy pulled from its mother’s teats.

Shirley counted the money carefully and left a little more bitter than

she came. “Thanks, you cheap bastards,” she said.

back.”

the mysteries of life.

After the war, prices went higher, but there was no change in the

pushcart business. The talk at meals was always money now. The
Glicksteins were behind in their rent. A newsboy’s take was no longer
enough to complement the old man’s income. The boys had to  nd
regular jobs.

Sammy and Israel both answered a call for messenger boys. There

were hundreds of others. For hours they cussed and fought each other for
places near the door because their parents had sent them all out with the
same  ght talk, spoken in English, Yiddish, Italian, and with a brogue—
Sammy, Israel, Joe, Pete, Tony, Mike, if you don’t get that job today we
don’t know what we’ll do.

Israel was just ahead of Sammy. They had been waiting since six in

the morning for the doors to open at eight. They were chilled outside,
nervous inside.

When the doors opened at last and Israel was  nally standing before

the checker, he was told:

“Sorry, kid—ain’t hirin no Hebes.”
As Israel hesitated there, crying inside, Sammy suddenly threw himself

at him and knocked him down.

“What the hell you do that for?” said the checker.
“That dirty kike cut in ahead of me,” Sammy screamed.
The checker looked at Sammy curiously. Sammy stood there, small,

spiderlike, intense, snarling at Israel.

“Fer Chris’sake, you look like a few-boy yerself.”
“Oh, Jesus, everybody’s always takin’ me for one of them goddam

sheenies,” Sammy yelled. Then he broke into gibberish Italian.

At twelve years of age Sammy made one bat out of hell of a

messenger. For the  rst few months he just did a good fast routine job.
Then he began to catch on to ways of branching out. He started dropping

in at the cat-houses on his way home. He would ring the bell—any bell—
and tell the maid:

“Willya  nd out who rang for a messenger boy?”
In a couple of minutes the maid would return and say, “Can’t  nd

nobody who says they called you, sonny.”

Then he’d put up his squawk. “Mean to tell me I hadda come allerway

down here for nuttin ’? Somebody in here musta called—the boss sent
me down here on the double-quick. Whatta you wanna do, get me
canned?”

is probably right, she’d  gure. Maybe one of the men did it for laughs or
got drunk and forgot.

times the madame would yell, “Anybody want the messenger boy before
he goes?” Then some of the customers would remember to wire their
wives or the girls would want to send out for ice cream or a magazine.

After Sammy got inside he had another stunt that nearly always

worked. He would stand in the middle of the main room and start
singing a song. His voice was lousy, but he wasn’t shy about using it and
he usually sang something with a gulp in it, like “You made me what I
am today—I hope you’re satis ed,” which always got the girls. So the
guys would toss him something to please them—or to shut him up.
Sometimes on Saturday nights he’d take in more that way than from his
regular weekly wage.

It made Sammy feel pretty good hanging around with the guys on the

corner Sundays with a little dough in his pocket. One Sunday morning
Sheik singled him out. Sheik already had the secretive, mannered poise of
a racketeer.

“Follow me over tuh the park,” Sheik said. “ I wanna talk tu ya.”
Two years before when they had been the heads of rival gangs,

Sammy’s men had cornered Sheik on a roof. Everybody knew what
Sammy had taken from him and they were all ready for Sammy to tell
them to send the Sheik back to his block with a hole in his head. But
Sammy just looked at Sheik kind of funny and said, “Go on, get runnin’,
you bastard, get the hell outa my block.”

It meant that Sammy was beginning to understand the secret of power.

Having Sheik beaten to a pulp would only have evened the score.
Without ever having thought it out, Sammy seemed to know intuitively
how this gesture would leave him one up on Sheik.

time. You got balls. You’re O.K. with me.”

“Come on, what d’ya want?” said Sammy. “What’s on ya mind?”
“I’m fed up with this stinking hole,” Sheik said. “I’m gettin’ outa here.

I’m gonna pull o  one little job and head west. And I wanna cut you in.”

pushcart snitches. Sammy was to go into Levy’s and ask for something
that would make Levy go back into the storeroom to look for it. Then
Sheik would run in and lay one on him and tie him up while Sammy was
ri ing the cash register.

Sammy listened soberly.
“Not me,” he said. “That’s sucker stu . Why the hell take a chance

goin’ up the river when there’s plenty better ways, if you’re smart?”

“Like what?” said Sheik.
“Lookit Johnny Maloney,” Sammy said. “He’s o  your block. His kid

brother tol’me Johnny makes a couple a hundred smackers every election
day—just for takin’ people around ’n’ votin’ ’em. And lookit Salica. He
ain’t so much older ’n’ us. Salica must be gettin’ richer ’n’ a bastard.
Every time a guy gets laid around here it’s dough in his pocket. What’s
the percentage in havin’ the cops against yer when you can do something
like that and have ’em with ya?”

years in the State Reform School. So did Leo Kaplan, the kid Sheik got to
take Sammy’s place.

Three weeks before Sammy’s thirteenth birthday Papa came in too

upset to eat.

“Tonight when I come out of shul the rabbi wants to talk to me. ‘Max,

my heart is like lead to tell you this,’ he says, ‘but your son Samuel
cannot be bar mitzvah. He never comes to cheder. He does not know

his bruchas. The melamed says he knows no more about the Torah than
a goy.’  ”

Bar-mitzvah is the Hebrew ceremony celebrating a boy’s reaching the

state of manhood at the age of thirteen. He shows o  all his knowledge
and makes a speech which always begins, “Today I am a man  …” and
everybody gives him presents and congratulates the father and feels very
good. It is as vital to the Orthodox Jews as baptism is to the Christians.

“Oy voy!” Papa cried. “That I should live to see the day when my own

 esh and blood is not prepared to become a man.”

a lotta crap. I been a man since I was eleven.”

shame? That I, a man who went to synagogue twice every day of his life,
should have such a no-good son.”

who was hustlin’ up the dough to pay the rent?”

“Silence, silence,” Papa roared.
“I guess I gotta right to speak in this house,” Sammy said. “For Chris

’sake I’m bringin’ in more money ’n you are.”

“Money!” Papa cried. “That’s all you think about, money, money  …”
“Yes, money, money,” Sammy mimicked. “You know what you c’n do

with your lousy bar mitzvah. It’s money in the pocket—that’s what
makes you feel like a man.”

the synagogue and prayed for him as if he were dead. He came home
with his lapel ripped in mourning. He would have liked to lock himself in
all week because he couldn’t face the shame of it. But the next day he
had to be out in the street again, an extension of his pushcart.

People saw him push his cart through the street with his eyes staring

dumbly at nothing. The driver who hit him said he sounded his horn
several times, but the old man did not seem to hear.

crying and watching him die.

Afterward, Israel didn’t know what to do, so he went up on the roof to

look at the stars. He found Sammy there smoking a butt.

“Is it over?” Sammy said when he saw his brother.

Israel nodded. He had not really broken down yet, but the question did

it. He cried, deep and soft, as only Jews can cry because they have had
so much practice at it.

Israel was eighteen, but now he was a little boy crying because he had

lost his papa. Sammy was thirteen, but he was a veteran; he had learned
something that took the place of tears.

When Israel realized that he was the only one crying he became

embarrassed and then angry.

you cry?”

“Well, what’s there ta say?” said Sammy.
“At least, can’t you say you’re sorry?”
“Sure,” Sammy said. “I’m sorry he was a dope.”
“I oughta punch you in the nose,” Israel said.
“Try it,” Sammy said, “I bet I c’n lick you.” Sammy sat there dry and

tense. “Aw, don’t work yourself into a sweat,” he said.

“Sammy,” Israel pleaded, “what’s got into you? Why must you go

around with a chip on your shoulder? What do you have to keep your
left out all the time for?”

see me getting smacked in the puss.”

“But we aren’t  ghting now,” Israel said.
Israel was right about not knowing Sammy. There were no rest periods

between rounds for Sammy. The world had put a chip on his shoulder
and then it had knocked it o . Sammy was ready to accept the challenge
all by himself and this was a  ght to the  nish. He had fought to be born
into the East Side, he had kicked, bit, scratched and gouged  rst to
survive in it and then to subdue it, and now that he was thirteen and a
man, having passed another kind of bar mitzvah, he was ready to  ght
his way out again, pushing uptown, running in Israel’s cast-o  shoes,
traveling light, without any baggage or a single principle to slow him
down.

I was sitting in the corner at the end of the bar and, like all

thinkers who are on the verge of a great discovery, feeling
miserable.

Henry leaned over the bar and picked up my empty glass.
“Henry, do you know what I’ve been doing for the past two

hours?” I asked.

“Yes,” said Henry, “getting plastered.”
“No,” I said, “working out a theory that will end hate in the

world.”

“That’s the same thing,” said Henry.
“Now, Henry, I want you to listen carefully,” I said. “Because Fate

has chosen you as the  rst one to hear my message. Do you
remember Sammy Glick?”

“Do you ever let me forget him?” Henry said.
“Okay,” I said. “When Sammy Glick  rst walked into my o ce he

turned my stomach. But just think if when he walked in I’d known
as much about him as I do now.” I punctuated my speech with
thoughtful gulps. “We only hate the results of people. But people,
Henry, aren’t just results. They’re a process. And to really give them
a break we have to judge the process through which they became
the result we see when we say So-and-so is a heel. Now the world is
full of people hating other people’s guts. Okay. Now, Henry, answer
me this, what if each of them took the time to go down to Rivington
Street—I mean each person’s particular Rivington Street, Henry? We
would begin to have compassion in the world, that’s what. Not so
much soda this time, Henry.”

“I don’t think you better have any more, Mr. Manheim,” Henry

said.

appreciated in his own time.”

I went to the phone and put through a call to Hollywood 3187.
“Hello?” she said.
“Hello,” I said, waiting expectantly.
“Hello,” she said.
“Remember I said I’d call you if I ever found out why Sammy

loves shoes so much?”

“Al, you’re drunk!” And then with a slight reprimand: “Darling!”
“And,” I gloated, “I know why Sammy hates unions and why he

treats all women like pros and all men like enemies. Kit, you gave

me a terri c steer. And I haven’t only learned about Sammy. I’ve
learned something about the machinery that turns out Sammy
Glicks.”

“Congratulations,” she said. “Don’t you think you’d better reverse

the charges? You can’t a ord a long-distance call like this.”

“Of course I can’t,” I said. “Anybody would call you up if he could

a ord it. But to be unable to a ord it and do it anyway—that’s
love.”

“You still haven’t changed?” she said.
“No. Have you?”
“No,” she said. “If I ever have a husband you are de nitely it.”
“That will be a very comforting thought to go to my grave with,” I

said. “Here lies the husband chosen by Kit—if she ever had one he
was de nitely it.”

to Hollywood?”

again?”

should be doing can make worse ghosts than ex-lovers.”

“Now that I’ve got a line on what makes Sammy run, maybe I

should begin on you.”

“I’m not running anywhere,” she said. “I’ll be right where you left

me. But you might work on Whither Is He Running?”

“That reminds me,” I said. “Whither is he?”
“Well, there’s been another shake-up at World-Wide, and Sidney

Fineman has his old spot back as head man. And I’ll give you one
guess who his assistant is.”

“How is he making out?” I said.
“So-so,” she said. “I mean he hasn’t got Fineman’s job yet.”
“Give him time,” I said.
“Give him nothing,” she said. “He’ll take time. I think he even

counterfeits time. Throws a couple of extra hours into every day.”

“Your three minutes are up,” said the operator.
“Hang up, Al,” she said. “Now it will be my turn to call you.

These were three of the nicest minutes I’ve spent in months.”

“Do you love me?” I said.
“Would I tell you to hang up if I didn’t?”
I hung up and went back to the bar and  nally talked Henry into

giving me another drink—if I promised not to give out with any
more theories.

“Okay,” I said, “but I hope you have no objections if I just sit here

and think anything I like.”

“Not as long as you don’t move your lips,” said Henry.
I thought about attraction. My attraction for Kit. The attraction

Sammy had for us that brought us together. I tried to trace it all
through again. I kept wanting to get it straight in my mind.

I thought of Sammy Glick rocking in his cradle of hate,

malnutrition, prejudice, suspicions, amorality, the anarchy of the
poor; I thought of him as a mangy little puppy in a dog-eat-dog
world. I was modulating my hate for Sammy Glick from the
personal to the societal. I no longer even hated Rivington Street but
the idea of Rivington Street, all Rivington Streets of all nationalities
allowed to pile up in cities like gigantic dung heaps smelling up the
world, ambitions growing out of  lth and crawling away like
worms. I saw Sammy Glick on a battle eld where every soldier was
his own cause, his own army and his own  ag, and I realized that I
had singled him out not because he had been born into the world
any more sel sh, ruthless and cruel than anybody else, even though
he had become all three, but because in the midst of a war that was
sel sh, ruthless and cruel Sammy was proving himself the  ttest,
the  ercest and the fastest.

OceanofPDF.com

I was sitting at my typewriter hoping for an interruption when the
phone rang.

“Mr. Manheim,” a smooth male voice began importantly. “I am

calling for Mr. Glick.”

“Well, for Chris’sake, when did he blow in?”
The way the important voice ignored my familiarity was a quiet

reprimand. “Mr. Glick only expects to be in town a short time and I
am making up a list of his appointments for the week. He would like
to have you come in this Thursday at six o’clock.”

Why not? I thought. Now that I  nally have him cross-indexed in

my mind, he can’t give me mental indigestion any more. I can just
sit back and watch him running through the next act as if it were a
Greek tragedy. Or rather, an American tragedy.

“Okay,” I said. “I guess I can make it. Where do I go?”
“Waldorf Towers,” he said. “Suite Thirty-three E.”
Twinkle, twinkle little guy, I thought. Up above the world so high.
When I  nally found my way up to Sammy’s apartment, I was

admitted by his Man Friday, Sheik Dugan, who ushered me in with
beautiful manners, and I realized who it was I had spoken to on the
phone. It was di cult to determine what Sheik’s o cial status was,
but from the variety of duties he seemed to perform during my visit
I would guess he had become a sort of combination secretary, valet,
business manager, companion and procurer.

Sheik’s manner made me feel I was being led before royalty as he

guided me through the lavish sitting room to an enormous, high-
ceilinged bedroom where Sammy was sitting in a silk, initialed
lounging robe while some guy was down on his knees in front of
him tracing the outline of his foot on a special piece of paper.

just authority.

hand, the Hollywood handshake. “Be with you in a minute. Just
being measured for some shoes.”

measuring his foot from every possible angle and writing it all down
on the chart. I sat there and watched the ceremony.

announced. “The right is eight and two- fths, width an even B.”

Sammy seemed pleased with the discrepancy. “You see,” he said,

“that’s why I have to have my shoes made to order. They may cost a
little more but they wear twice as long. And when shoes don’t  t me
perfectly, I get headaches.”

telling Mr. Glick anything about shoes,” he said. “He knows more
about them than I do!”

“Well, in my business shoes are important,” Sammy explained. “I

must walk nine or ten miles every story conference.”

“Now, what we like to do with our regular clients,” said the

salesman, “is make a plaster mold of their feet. Then our designers
can draw up any style shoe you wish and you’re sure of getting a
one-hundred-percent perfect  t.”

pose for a bronze bust.

“Fine,” he said. “On your way out check with Mr. Dugan as to

when I’ll have time for you again.”

“Thank you very much, Mr. Glick,” said the shoe expert and he

salaamed out.

been going for you?”

employer showing that he still knows the elevator boy’s name.

Sheik poked his head in the door. “Better start dressing, tootsie.

Rita says she’ll be down in twenty minutes.”

laid out?”

“Maybe I better duck,” I said.
“No,” Sammy said. “Stick around. New York’s such a merry-go-

round I may not have time to see you again. This trip is one of those
quickies. Just in to catch some shows and see a few people and back
to the jute mill. Let’s talk while I’m dressing.”

moment to use. It reminded me of the famous director who even
had his secretary go on reading scripts to him through the bathroom
door.

as he started to throw his clothes on the bed. “You should have
heard what she was giving out with about you this morning.
Absolutely meshugah for you. You’re a sweet guy to go to all that
trouble.”

too much like sucking around. That was the only way Sammy saw it
and it seemed to give him a new respect for me. He felt I was
catching on.

He was stripped down to his silk shorts and I had to follow him to

the bathroom as he started to shave.

the Coast,” Sammy said. “Isn’t she a great character? What the hell,
we don’t know how to be happy. We don’t know we’re having a
good time until the waiter at the Troc hands us a check for a
hundred bucks.”

Sammy Glick, I thought, the homely philosopher of the Waldorf

Towers.

“I tell you, it was a real thrill,” Sammy went on. “But this’ll kill

you. As I was getting out of the cab, some Hebe who was unloading
a  sh wagon took a look at me and yelled, ‘Well, how d’ya like it
down here? Enjoying the sights?’ Is that a laugh? Right on the spot
where I was born!”

a wraparound camel’s-hair and an Eddie Schmidt suit, and some

little guy Sammy might have gone to school with, a Jewish
workman up since  ve, smelling of  sh and hating his job, suddenly
crying out his bitterness at this arrogant slummer.

Jewish  sh-boy didn’t know it but he was right. The closest Sammy
could ever get to recapturing his youth was to go slumming.

clean blue shadow. I followed him back into the bedroom again as
Sheik began to help him into his evening clothes.

in a new, e cient voice. “So I better tell you what I’ve got in mind
for you. I suppose you know I’m assisting Sidney Fineman with the
whole program. But just before I left the Coast I talked him into
letting me make a couple of pictures on my own. These have to be
B’s of course. But I want them to be unusual B’s—little pictures with
big ideas.”

“Little pictures which show that you should be making the big

pictures,” I said.

look innocent, but I knew he was beginning to su er just as much
about playing second  ddle to Fineman as he had about being a
copy boy or only making  ve hundred dollars a week. Instead of
sitting on the roof of the tenement with that terrible hunger to be
out of the slums, he was up there on top of the Waldorf going crazy
to get out of the B-picture  eld he was just about to enter.

“I’ve got plenty of great ideas,” he said. “One of them is to make a

newspaper picture—only not the usual drunken reporter and
madcap heiress crap. The real thing—the way you and I know it.
Hoked up of course.”

“Something like The Front Page?” I said.
I couldn’t even get a rise out of him any more. That night at

Paine’s swimming pool he was pretending to be a big shot. Now he
was beginning to be one and the di erence was interesting.

“Something like that,” he said. “Only more (he snapped his

 ngers loudly) up-to-date, more of an exposé. And I’m thinking of
bringing you out to do the job.”

thought of that day he ran o  with half my column. And I thought
how funny it was that this latest gesture could spring from kindness,
loyalty, shrewdness or sheer perversity.

“It won’t be like working for one of those high-powered

producers,” he was saying. “You’ll be able to get to me any time you
need help.”

“You forget who I am,” I said. “Blacklist Bill. Don’t let my gentle

expression fool you. I am a subversive in uence.”

“For Christ’s sake, I can get on the phone and clean that up in two

minutes,” he said.

I was even willing to let Sammy send me into the game. But since I
had no illusions about how long my benefactor would stand by me
if he found he didn’t need me, I thought I had better hold that need
up to the light of reason a moment or two before I rushed for my
trunk.

“What makes you so hot for me all of a sudden? I should think

you’d want to start playing safe with a top-notch screen writer.”

“I’ve thought it out from every angle,” he said. “All I can spend on

these pictures is two hundred grand, top. You  gure your writing
cost shouldn’t be over ten percent of the whole nut, so I couldn’t
a ord any of the top guys, anyway. Which is okay with me. What
the hell, any halfwit is liable to get a good job out of a Lawrence
Paine or a Bob Gri n. Nobody is going to go around saying, Did
you see the great script Sammy Glick got out of Bob Gri n? And,
anyway, I’d like to start out with somebody congenial. I thought of
you  rst because of that promise I made in the Troc a couple of
years ago. You could have done me a lot of harm by shooting o 
your mouth that night. I like to have people loyal around me.”

mention. He was tackling something a little too early—like Shirley
Stebbins—and he was just as unsure of himself. He probably
wouldn’t stay scared very long but just at this moment it was
reassuring to have me work for him. It gave him that necessary
sense of power.

Israel had told me that when Sheik returned from reform school, he
got himself a string of dames, hung around with the East Side
gamblers and tried to muscle in on some of the small-fry rackets.
But he was just another tough guy in an overcrowded  eld and
about all he got for his troubles were a Heidelberg scar, a dose, and
a couple of years in the can.

The second time he got out he heard that Sammy was in the

dough out in Hollywood, so he wrote him for a little on account and
while he was about it he wondered if there was anything in
Hollywood he could do.

He didn’t really expect to get an answer but two weeks later a

letter arrived with a train ticket and traveling expenses. Sheik would
never understand why, but through this he became the instrument
of Sammy’s endless revenge. Now Sheik was well-fed and well-
mannered and elegant in white tie, but he was still the enemy slave
brought home behind the conqueror’s chariot. He was the
measuring stick that was always at Sammy’s elbow to remind him of
his rise. Here was Sheik, whose  sts had broken Sammy’s face,
living the life of his malevolent dreams, and yet hanging by a hair
which Sammy could snap any moment he wanted to drop him back
into the ratholes and the  op-joints again.

As I was going out, Rita Royce and her party blew in.

“This is one of my writers,” Sammy introduced me. “I’m bringing

him back to the Coast with me. He’s going to do my  rst picture,
Deadline.”

While my hand was making the rounds, Sammy said, “Better call

the Stork, Sheik, and tell them to hold that table for us—we’ll be
ready for dinner in about an hour.”

At the door Sammy punched my arm twice in rapid succession,

Jimmy Cagney fashion. “Well, I’m tickled to death to have you with
me, kid. I know we’re going to knock them for a row of Academy
Awards. I’ll have Sheik get a lower for you—right next to my

drawing room—so if you get any great ideas in the middle of the
night you can run right in and spill ’em, sweetheart.”

confess, I thought. The moment you heard that name you thought of
Hollywood again. You thought what that name could do for you.
You thought of all that Hollywood dough. You thought of getting
back to Kit.

I gave myself  ve minutes for rebuttal.
The trouble with Hollywood is that too many people who won’t

leave are ashamed to be there. But when a moving picture is right, it
socks the eye and the ear and the solar plexus all at once and that is
a hell of a temptation for any writer. I felt that when I went back for
the fourth time to see The Informer. And one afternoon when I
happened to catch a revival of the Murnau-Jannings masterpiece,
The Last Laugh. And even when I saw one of my own jobs, a stinker
if there ever was one, but with one scene in it that sang because I
happened to stumble onto real picture technique. That is what held
Kit there. Hollywood may be full of phonies, mediocrities, dictators
and good men who have lost their way, but there is something that
draws you there that you should not be ashamed of.

OceanofPDF.com

As Kit and I came out of the preview we could see Sammy leaning
against the lamppost with his hands in his pockets and his long cigar
blowing triumphant pu s like a Roman candle.

“Well, what do you think?” he said with a grin that told you what

he expected to hear.

“That’s a pretty good movie,” Kit said.
“When a sourpuss like you says pretty good, it must really be

terri c,” Sammy said.

Sheik sailed over, making that circle of approval with his thumb

and fore nger as he came. “Well, sweetheart,” he said, “it’s a killer.
Even tops Deadline for my dough.”

Sheik was still Sammy’s shadow but he had been promoted. He

was an agent now. He had just sort of drifted into it by going up to
an ingénue he knew Sammy was signing and telling her he would
use his in uence to have Sammy take her. Other clients followed
until now Sheik was clearing around three or four hundred a week.
Still in the small-fry class, but between his  rm grip on Sammy’s
coattails and his increasing popularity as a ladies’ man, Sheik was
de nitely on his way.

Word had gotten around that Sheik was an ex-mobster and soon,

with Hollywood’s talent for self-dramatization, Sheik had become a
famous gunman, in fact, Capone’s right-hand man. A killer whom
Sammy Glick and Hollywood had regenerated. This, along with his
other social attributes, had begun to make him a celebrity’s
celebrity.

“After Deadline the second-guessers were saying I could only make

mellers,” Sammy said. “Now they’ll be saying I can only make
comedies. It’s got a million laughs, hasn’t it?”

some of World-Wide’s other pictures. Outside of your two, this
year’s program is stinking up the studio so bad you have to have a
gas mask to go through the halls.”

As Sammy laughed, I noticed that his face was pu ng out a little

bit. The lean ferret look wasn’t gone—it was just beginning to be
framed with a  eshy border. Sheik watched Sammy’s face too,
joining in his laughter like the background people at a cue from the
director.

The leading lady knifed her way through, leaving a wake of

panicky autograph hounds.

“You were O.K.,” Sammy told her.
She made a little curtsy and told him it had been a pleasure to

work for him.

like the part. Doesn’t this prove that we always know what’s best for
you?”

As her public swallowed her up again, Sammy gave us a wink.

“When those babies go soft on you—that’s the time to sock it
home.”

under his eyes seemed more noticeable these days. His posture was
still erect and digni ed but you could feel him making the e ort to
keep it that way.

then he turned to Sammy with a tired, brave smile.

“Well, my boy, looks like you’ve done it again.”
Sammy shook his hand with a straight face. “Thank you, Mr.

Fineman,” he said, “let’s hope so.”

never really become him. He called Fineman Grandma behind his
back, when he wasn’t being more vivid.

as the crowd drifted away.

seems to get started too quickly. There doesn’t seem to be enough

time to plant the characters and the situation. What do you think,
Sammy?”

same thing. Sidney Fineman had his own studio in Hollywood when
Sammy was still hawking papers on 14th Street. He had been the
 rst one with enough daring to make a classic like Helen of Troy
when everyone else was making two-reel horse operas. He never
asked questions then.

When I  rst started writing the screenplay, Sammy had told me

speci cally that you never have to sell your characters or your plot
in a farce comedy. For a moment I thought he was going to tell
Fineman o  about that. But apparently he had decided the time
wasn’t ripe yet. For all he said was:

“Maybe you’re right. Let’s have another look at it in the morning.”
“Fine,” Fineman said. “Perhaps it will look better when we’re

fresh.”

Sammy smiled at him as if to say, Speak for yourself, pal, I never

felt fresher. “That’s right,” he said, “maybe it will.”

short. Sammy watched Fineman’s chau eur help him into his big
black limousine.

“The corpse is climbing back into his hearse,” Sammy cracked.
Only Sheik laughed.
“Well, where do we go from here?” Sammy said.
“Sunset Club,” Sheik said. “They’ve got a new dinge band there

that’ll kill ya.”

“What did you get for me?” Sammy said.
“Some brand-new stu ,” Sheik said. “Punkins Weaver.”
“Is she O.K.?” Sammy said.
“Until the real thing comes along,” Sheik sang. “Blonde. Willing.

Cute kid.”

Kit and I stopped in at one of the little bars on Vine Street, just

south of Hollywood Boulevard. All along the sidewalk were little
knots of poolroom characters who always seemed to be there,
holding mysterious conferences. Down the street the playboys were
getting out of red Cadillac phaetons or monogrammed town cars at

La Conga. There was something savage and tense about that street.
Autograph hunters prowled it, and ambitious young ladies in fancy
hair-dos and slacks.

“God, this is a tough town,” Kit said.
“Why is it tougher than anywhere else?” I said.
“Because it still has the gold-rush feeling,” she said. “The gold

rush was probably the only other set-up where so many people
could hit the jackpot and the skids this close together. It’s become a
major industry without losing the crazy fever of a gold-boom town.”

“What made you think of that? Fineman?”
She nodded. “Sometimes I think the three chief products this town

turns out are moving pictures, ambition and fear.”

dough, I still wouldn’t like to be in his shoes right now.”

shoes.”

forget Sammy likes to have his shoes  t.”

I sat in while they looked at the picture with the cutter again next
morning, stopping it reel by reel to talk it over.

“I guess you’re right about the opening at that,” Fineman said.

“Any more footage would make it drag.”

“I’m glad you see it my way,” Sammy said.
I don’t think Fineman saw anything more to it than that; an older

man and his younger assistant working together to tighten up their
picture. But I knew that tone in Sammy’s voice, the warning rattle.
It was like reading a Fu Manchu book and wondering how and when
the hand will strike.

After the picture had been run o , the cutter said, “Well, you

don’t have to worry about that one. I’ll run it through again this
afternoon and clean it up a little bit. If I nip a couple more hundred
feet out of it it’ll be tight as a drum.”

Fineman seemed to be thinking of something else.

“Walk back to my o ce with me.”

couple of minutes.”

rather delicate matter.”

That night I had to go over to Sammy’s for a conference on the next
picture. Sammy had moved from his apartment to one of those
Hollywood Colonial manors in upper Beverly Hills.

The  rst thing he did was show me through every room, rattling

o  the names of all the celebrities who had lived there before him
and the marquee names he had for neighbors.

“I tell you, there’s nothing like having a house of your own,” he

said. “I get up in the morning and look out at those palm trees and
the other big houses and I say to myself, Sammy, how did it all
happen?”

I have a couple of ideas on it, I thought, if you really want to

know.

“But now I’ll really show you something,” he said. “My grounds.”

He turned on the  oodlights that illuminated the garden. “I’ve got
my own barbecue pit and my own badminton court. And have I got
 owers! Do you realize you’re looking at twelve hundred dollars’
worth of hibiscus plants?”

“And you’re going to live here all alone?” I said.
“Well, the cook sleeps in,” Sammy said. “By the way, I’ve got

Claudette Colbert’s cook. And, of course, my man.”

He must have felt self-conscious about that, for he added, “He’s

o  tonight but he’s really something. I think he must have been
Ronald Colman’s stand-in. It’d panic you to see him bringing my
breakfast up in the morning in a full-dress suit. The  rst time he
stuck his puss in the door I said, ‘Charles, you look as if I ought to
be waiting on you.’ And Charles just gave me the business, ‘Yes, sir,
will there be anything else, sir?’ He never steps out of character!”

Neither do you, I thought, neither do you.
For the next couple of hours we sat in the study batting the story

back and forth. Sammy’s mind drew a blank when it came to
originality—but since the same goes for most screen stories, he
actually turned this to advantage. What he had was a good memory
and a glib way of using it. Our story was like so many others that he
could lift ready-made situations from the shelves in the back of his
mind, dust them o  and insert them into our yarn like standard
automobile parts.

“Now, I want you to work night and day on this,” he said.

“Because MGM is making a submarine picture too, only on a terri c
scale, and if we can get out with ours  rst we can steal a hell of a
march on them and cash in on their publicity.”

Our work was over and I started to go.
“It’s early yet,” Sammy said. “You don’t have to run. How about a

nightcap?”

and Dickens and twelve hundred bucks of hibiscus, but he didn’t
seem to know what to do with himself when he wasn’t talking to
somebody.

He mixed a drink for me. He was very solicitous. He said, “You

know we’ve been working so hard we never have a chance to talk
any more.”

and works of S. Glick. And while I was wondering, that is just what
the conversation drifted to again.

I happened to say that I thought Fineman was one of the best

gents in the business.

“I guess everybody in the studio likes him,” Sammy said. “But that

doesn’t mean so damn much. Between you and me, he’s just an old
woman. He’s beginning to lean on me like a crutch.”

said.

“That’s what I used to think,” Sammy said. “Until today.”
“The talk you had with Fineman?”

are saying, “The talk I had with Fineman.”

Okay, Sammy, I thought, spill it, you predatory genius.
“When I was in there talking with the old man, all of a sudden it

hit me—I had him by the balls. You understand, this is strictly
between you and me. It mustn’t go out of this room.”

you don’t tell it to somebody quick your lungs are going to blow up
in your face like punctured balloons.

Fineman  lled his pipe painstakingly and lit it It was hard to begin.
“Sammy, we’ve been working together for over a year now and I think

we understand each other. I’d like to feel I can talk to you as a friend.”

Sammy’s face was what is known as expressionless. A very de nite

and frightening expression.

“You know you can, sir,” he said.
“Good. You may not have learned it yet and I hope you never will—

but this is a business with a very short memory. It doesn’t matter what
you did last year or the year before. If your last few pictures are lemons,
you’re in hot water. That’s why I’ve decided to talk to you, Sammy. I
know you appreciate how much I’ve done for you—and I felt you’d be
willing to help me.”

Help. That was the turning point. That was the moment Sammy had

been waiting for. He sat there trying to look noncommittal, like a poker
player who has just discovered he is holding a royal  ush.

“I’m your man, Sidney,” Sammy said. “Just say the word.”
“Some of the Wall Street crowd who control our lot are coming out to

look over our production set-up.”

Sammy had got that tip from Young’s secretary two weeks before.
“They want to try to  nd out why we slumped to third place among

the major studios this year. And I have it from a fairly reliable source
that Harrington, the chairman of the board, favors a new production
chief. Now, these aren’t men who know pictures. They’ve got ticker tapes
in their brains. They know the pictures I let you make have been our
most solid moneymakers and they’ll be interested in hearing what you’ve

got to say. You know what I mean, I want them to know that we’re
working well together. And, if I’m still in harness, I’ll tell you what I’ll do
for you: Let you make four of the A’s on next year’s program—even
suggest that you head your own independent unit, if that’s what you
want—and I’ll get a new assistant. There’s a new lad on the lot called
Ross who’s supposed to be very promising. How does that sound?”

Somewhere between the time Fineman started that speech and the time

he  nished, one era ended and another began. Sammy had sneered at
Fineman before, but that had been mostly bravado for Sheik’s bene t. He
had entered the o ce still in awe of him. Now, as Fineman went on
talking, Sammy could see him shrinking as if he had drunk an Alice-in-
Wonderland potion. Wondering, what the hell keeps that weak sister in
this o ce at  ve G’s a week? An old-fashioned story mind—a quiet,
indirect method of getting his way that’s supposed to pass for executive
ability—an old-womanishness that’s won him the reputation of best-loved
producer.

“Sid, old pal,” Sammy said. “You’re in. Just let them come to me. I’ll

give them an earful Ani it will come from right here.”

He tapped the breast pocket of his camel’s-hair jacket reverently.
And while he was tapping it he got a new idea.
Sammy spent hours with Fineman at the o ce every day, but at night,

except for the occasional Grand Central Station parties, there was a
barrier. Fineman had never asked Sammy to his dinner parties or his
Sunday morning breakfasts. Sammy  nally had to give up hinting. It got
Sammy sore just thinking about it. So I’m not good enough for the
bastard’s home, but I’m good enough to save his lousy job for him! And
Sammy never just got sore. Nothing so luxurious as that. He always got
sore with a plan.

“Look, Sid,” he said. “Why wait for these Wall Street guys to come to

me? Why wouldn’t it be smart for me to start working on them the day
they blow in? What if I threw a big party for them at my new house, a
swell dinner, and entertainment, with all our stars there …?”

said.

I’d have to come to my own boss’s party. But if I give a party in their

honor, also celebrating the  rst anniversary of our association …!”

“If it’s handled right it might have a good e ect at that,” Fineman

re ected.

“Don’t worry,” Sammy said. “It’ll be handled right.”

“So a week from Saturday I break into the society columns,”

Sammy said. “And by the way, you and Kit are invited. You two are
still an item, aren’t you?”

“A permanent one, I hope.”
“By God, that’s what I need,” Sammy said suddenly. “I’m getting

fed up with these  oozies you’re always promising something to—a
day’s work or a test. A man in my position ought to settle down and
get some dignity in his life.”

“You mean you’re thinking of getting married?”
“Why not?” he said. “Hell, I’m not one of these guys who’s spoiled

by getting in the dough. You know I’m just a simple down-to-earth
guy at heart. All I want is a sweet, healthy girl to put my slippers on
when I come home from work and give me a bunch of kids who can
enjoy what I’ve got—maybe a nice bright kid to take over my
business when I retire.”

“Have you got anybody in mind for the job?” I said.
“Well,” he said, “I’ve been thinking about it. I’m really thinking

seriously of Ruth Mintz. You know, the daughter of the shorts
producer on our lot? A nice re ned girl. No beauty, but, hell, this
town is lousy with beauty, and that’s only good for about ten years,
anyway. She’s got a nice build. And she’s nuts about kids. What
more could I want?”

“I don’t know,” I said, “what more could you? Do you love her?”
“Love,” he said. “How the hell have I had time to love anybody?”

When I  nally made a break, I met Kit at the Derby for co ee. She
was coming from a Guild meeting. The Guild had risen from the
dead after the Nine Old Men decided to cut the nonsense and
declare the Wagner Act constitutional. Three or four hundred

writers had returned to the fold again and the battle now was to get
the NLRB to come in and hang a company-union charge on the
Photodramatists.

“How was the meeting?” I said.
“We saw through the night that our Guild was still there,” Kit

hummed o  key, patriotically. “How was yours?”

“Sammy was in a re ective mood,” I said.
“Was he sick?”
“No, he was falling in love.”
“With whom? Himself again?”
“With the idea of someone to bring his slippers to him when he

comes home at night. And someone to give him an heir.”

repeat the name Sammy Glick  ve hundred times.”

said.

minute.

“Did Sammy ever ask you to marry him?”
“Of course not! All Sammy is looking for is a nice simple

housewife like his mother told him to marry, who looks like
Dietrich, whose only interest in life is Sammy Glick, and whose
father is a millionaire who can  nance Sammy’s company and put
him in with the Best People.” She laughed and added, “And all I had
to o er was the Dietrich department.”

say you were exactly homely.”

“Ah, you’ve hit on it at last—exactly. People look at me and say,

she’s homely all right, but not exactly homely. And there you have
the secret of my charm.”

“By God, you’re right,” I said. “I never realized it before. But

there’s something about your face that’s fooled me for years into
thinking it’s beautiful. It’s just your personality shining out like one
of Oleson’s giant spots. And if you ever switched it o  you’d be
homely as sin.”

here in the open.”

The night of the party Kit and I saw it happen, saw love come to
Sammy Glick, or something as close to love as Sammy will ever
know. Kit and I and little Ruth Mintz.

This is the way it began. The other members of the Wall Street

scouting party were punctual, but Harrington didn’t show until the
bu et dinner was almost over.

He came in with a dame on his arm, an amazing-looking dame,

who made an entrance like the star at the end of the  rst act. The
 rst thing that clicked when I looked at her was the horse shows in
the rotogravure section of the Sunday Times. Only not the smartly
tailored horsewoman in derby and cutaway, but the horse itself. She
was a show horse with a dark red mane, prancing, beautifully
groomed, high spirited, accustomed and proud to be on exhibition.

If Harrington’s life were ever screened, he would be played by

Lewis Stone, though Stone would have to go easy on the make-up
and underplay his scenes to do the role justice.

Sammy spotted them at the door like a master of ceremonies,

beckoned Fineman over to do the honors and ran toward them.

“Mr. Glick,” Harrington spoke in e cient snaps. “Very glad to

meet you, sir. I’ve been looking forward to this. I’d like you to meet
my daughter, Laurette. ”

Sammy made a nervous little bow and kept on looking at her. She

seemed to fascinate him. He went on staring at her with the out-of-
this-world look of a monk at the Shrine of the Madonna, or a strip-
tease patron.

“I know that girl,” Kit said. “Laurette Harrington. She was at

Vassar for a little while.”

“I think we’re on hand for an historic event,” I said. “Sammy

Glick is falling in love.”

“Sammy isn’t impetuous enough for that,” she said. “He’s just

falling in love with the idea of being in love with a gal like that.”

standing beside Sammy, but she might just as well have been
standing in Outer Mongolia.

“Father hates being late,” Miss Harrington was saying. “It’s all my

fault. I came home frightfully late after looking at pictures all day.”

pictures did you see?”

“Well, one I’ve really been chasing all over the world,” she said.

“Blue Boy.”

“Blue Boy?” Sammy said. “A foreign picture?”
“Not exactly,” Laurette said. “It was done in England.”
“Oh, Gaumont-British,” Sammy said.
“No, by an Independent,” she said. “Gainsborough.”
People started to laugh. She began to laugh with them. When she

did, tossing her head back, I had the impression of a red  ame
leaping up, red hair, full red lips and somehow her voice was red
too.

“That,” Kit mumbled, “would be a bitch.”
Harrington stepped in and stopped the fun. “I’m afraid you’re

misunderstanding each other. Laurette means the paintings at the
Huntington.”

By that time the story was on its way toward becoming a

Hollywood legend. By the next evening it would be attributed to at
least three other people.

part of his falling in love with her. Like his revenge on Sheik. He
stood there in the hallway of his  ve-hundred-a-month house,
hosting his  rst big Hollywood party and someone had suddenly
hauled o  and socked him and he just stood there, taking it, looking
as he must have looked when he was taking his beatings from Sheik,
telling her she could leave her wrap upstairs, staring after her as if
he would like to murder or rape her.

Everywhere I looked, Sammy seemed to be running after Laurette.

I had the impression of a chunky, gutty pony, stepping way up in
class, coming up on the outside to challenge the tall, graceful
thoroughbred on the rail. He was  lling her plate for her, drinking

brandy with her, dancing with her out on the patio to the rhumba
orchestra. As they danced she looked a head taller because she
danced it professionally, with her shoulders straight and her head
tilted up while Sammy tore into it with his head down like a
prize ghter. Now and then she would look down and bestow a smile
upon him that was cold and too perfect on her lips.

Kit said, “There’s Ruth Mintz, looking like the little girl who’s lost

her mother at the circus. Go and dance with her or  irt with her or
something.”

When I picked Kit up again she had just run into Laurette in the

powder room.

“I should have come here ages ago,” Laurette had told her. “Isn’t

Sammy Glick amusing? Dad says he’s a dynamo. After the Great
Danes from Yale and Princeton sni ng around me all summer, it
might be fun to know a dynamo.”

“How long are you staying?” Kit said.
“I’m toying with the idea of taking a house for the winter,”

Laurette said. “And I’m going to keep it absolutely jammed with
theatrical people. I simply adore them.”

Laurette wasn’t a particularly witty girl, but she delivered all her

lines as if she were, and by pointing them up with laughs she gave
an impression of both great wit and vitality.

“Laurette babbles like an idiot,” Kit said. “But I don’t think she is.

I get the feeling she has a good mind which she’s been brought up to
believe is very poor taste for a woman of her position to use.”

On our way back from the patio I found Sammy chatting with

Harrington and the other bankers and I paused a moment with Ruth
to see if the sight of her would revive his interest in the girl he had
chosen to be his slipper-and-child-bearer.

going over.

then a creator,” Sammy was out-yessing them. “First we have to
analyze the slump of the industry as a whole. I  gure it’s ten percent
the jump in radio popularity,  fteen percent double features,
twenty- ve percent the national decline in purchasing power and

 fty percent the lack of new ideas in pictures themselves. Too many
people are coming out of theaters saying, ‘I saw that same movie
last month.’ ”

 rst went to work for him. Only Sammy seemed to know just how to
feed it to them. Knew how they loved to listen to the sound of
 gures and statistics.

men out here who think of pictures as a commodity like any other—
and forget this prestige business.”

all, pictures are shipped out in cans. We’re in the canning business.
Our job is to  nd some way of making sure that every shipment will
make a pro t.”

I wondered where Fineman was. I wanted to be around when

Sammy put in that right word for him.

He could run with these men. They had college degrees and

belonged to clubs and had summer homes and knew Herbert
Hoover, but he knew what they were after. Laurette was di erent.
She wasn’t a whore and she wasn’t an extra girl, and she wasn’t a
star and she wasn’t a working girl, and she wasn’t a homebody and
that perplexed him. Her job was not to do anything and do it
attractively and amusingly. Sammy couldn’t bribe her with a day’s
work, or slap her on the fanny, and he couldn’t even talk about
himself without being heckled. She was someone he had to be polite
to and that cramped his style. He felt she was laughing at him
because his manners weren’t up to her standard and this
undermined his con dence. And Sammy Glick without his
con dence was not a pretty sight.

“Mr. Glick, can you make a noise like a dynamo?” I heard her say

and Sammy just looked ill at ease and let her get away with it. Just
looked at her as if to say, Okay, baby, you win the  rst round, you
draw  rst blood, but it’s just enough to make me sore. These are big
stakes and I’m willing to let you jab away until your arm gets tired
and I begin to catch onto your style.

Sammy’s life, Sammy was leading Laurette out to show her his
twelve hundred dollars’ worth of hibiscus.

At lunch in the commissary next day Kit looked over my shoulder
and said, “Well! The Little King and the Red Queen.”

I looked around as they were coming in together. They posed a

moment at the entrance. Laurette, slightly taller, the chic and
haughty queen, with a green suede bag slung over her shoulder, a
green turban pulling her copper-colored hair straight back from her
face. You felt that everything was pulled tight on her, that her
stockings were pulled as tight against her legs as possible, that the
waistline was drawn in to the fraction of an inch, that she was
rigged smart and snug as a ship. Sammy almost started in ahead of
her and then he remembered and stepped aside to let her lead. He
followed close behind her, with the preoccupied casualness of one
who knows he is being watched. But he was so proud of the e ect
their being together was having that he couldn’t keep the
exhilaration out of his face.

They passed near our table and disappeared into the executives’

dining room o  the main commissary.

“She’s an exotic-looking thing,” I said.
“You mean those droopy lids and the dark shadows under her

eyes?” Kit said. “That’s dissipation.”

“Just the same,” I said, “she looks like quite a dish. How come

none of the aristobrats ever grabbed her o ?”

“Seems to me she was married,” Kit said. “The year she came out.

But it didn’t take. When she entered Vassar she had just come back
from a year in Spain, trying to forget. I think she managed to forget
all right, but in the process she got the habit of living as if she were
always supposed to be forgetting something. Her mother was dead
and I guess the old man was too busy staying rich to do much about
it. Everybody talked about the way she came to class the  rst day

with painted toenails. She caused quite a stir, while she lasted. A
little bit like Tallulah Bankhead enrolling as a freshman at Smith.”

“I wonder what they have to talk to each other about,” I said. “I’d

love to listen in on that conversation.”

“I wouldn’t,” Kit said. “She’s probably telling him of the

screaming times she used to have in Biarritz before the Spanish War
made the town so horribly political. And Sammy is wondering
whether he’s making too much noise with his soup.…”

“And how much in uence she has with her old man,” I added.
“I think you’re underrating him,” she said. “This isn’t just

business. Didn’t you see his face? The bloom of true love is upon
him at last.”

“But I wonder how goddam glamorous she’d look to him if her

name weren’t Harrington.”

“It can’t be broken down like that. Sammy isn’t making a

mechanical play for her because he thinks he can use her. It’s all
mixed up together. The fact that her name is Harrington must be
just as sexually exciting to Sammy as that moist red mouth or those
snooty boobs of hers.”

We could follow the courtship in the papers after that. The

orchids every day. The places they were seen dancing. The gifts. The
photographers even gave us the tender looks on their faces over
plates of hamburger in the Derby. A Hollywood columnist included
it in her radio discussion of exciting romances of the year.

him talking to her on the phone but he never mentioned anything
about it until a month or so later when I was at his house going over
the script for the submarine picture. I had  nished the job a couple
of days ahead of schedule and he was in a good mood. He sent
Charles to the bar to make us some highballs and then he turned to
me with his preview face.

“Well, Al, what do you think of me and Laurette?”
He seemed to let the sentence drip over his tongue like tasting

 ne wine.

“Well, it all seems pretty fantastic,” I said. “But maybe you’ll be

fantastically happy.”

might. Jesus! I can’t believe it myself. But it’s beginning to look as if
I’m going to get her.”

may not be in line of business but it’s grim enough to be.

I thought she was just another Miss Rich Bitch. Just gave her a little
rush because I thought I might be able to get a line on how Sidney
stood with her old man. I guess I told you I was trying to do
everything I can for him. And she kept taking me up on all my
invites, but all the time she was doing it she was giving me the
polite  nger.”

There was the moment after Sammy had taken her to lunch the  rst

day when he squeezed all his savoir faire into: “And when shall I see
you again?” And she answered: “Now I know who puts that line in all
the movies.”

Several evenings later he was taking her to an opening. He had even

bought a new full-dress suit. Made for the occasion. He had sent out
advance notices to the press agents that he and Miss Harrington would
be among the notable couples attending.

When he called on her Laurette was in street clothes, having a drink

with a hefty dame in a boy’s haircut who greeted him with a belligerent
stare.

“This is Babe Lynch, ” Laurette said. “She just  ew into town on her

way to the air races in San Diego. I haven’t seen her in ages, so I knew
you wouldn’t mind if I passed up the opening tonight.”

“If you had told me early enough I could have gotten an extra ticket, ”

Sammy said. “In fact, if you make it snappy I can always  nd a way of
getting her in. It isn’t our opening, but I’m a pal of the theater manager.”

“That’s sporting of you,” Laurette said. “But Babe only brought her

 ying togs. So why don’t you run along? Call me in the afternoon.”

Sammy swallowed his pride, but it stuck in his throat like a  sh bone.

Going down in the elevator he tore up the tickets. As they fell around his
feet in little pieces he realized he might have given them to somebody, but

to hell with everybody  …  They were his tickets and he could do what he
liked with them.

sixty, seventy miles an hour, as fast as he wanted because he had a
captain’s badge from the Police Department. Thinking, I’m going to get
her. She thinks she’s too good for me, but I’m going to get her, me,
Sammy Glick.

worth being insulted for. Sammy was running with Class, and Class was
something strange and wonderful. He had a crazy hunch that if he didn’t
care how much dust he ate in the early laps, he could snap the tape with
his strong little chest.

The next evening Sammy called the Beverly-Wilshire again. Hollywood

is a terrible place to be left alone in, he said. She might want someone to
show her the bright spots.

“How sweet of you,” Laurette said. “Come right over.”
When he arrived, she was having cocktails with a young man. The

young man stood up, terribly tanned and tall, looking down at Sammy
with an easy, attractive, self-assured smile. Sammy found himself staring
into a broad and immaculate expanse of sti  shirt. Laurette was in
evening clothes too.

“I thought George was on the other side of the globe,” she explained,

ignoring Sammy’s face as she introduced them. “Imagine how thrilled I
was when I found out he was back in Pasadena. I thought it might be fun
if we all went together.”

George didn’t seem to mind Sammy at all, which made it worse.
“I haven’t seen Laurie since Biarritz two summers ago,” he explained

with a maximum of white teeth as he poured Sammy a cocktail.

He was sore this time. He was so sore he forgot this was a precious bit

of china that a loud word might crack.

“Listen, Miss Harrington, don’t let me butt in. Why don’t you two kids

just run along and have a good time?”

But Miss Harrington would not hear of it. “Mr. Glick is so clever,” she

told the bronzed face from Pasadena. “He knows everything about
making pictures. He’s going to tell us all about it at dinner. Aren’t you,
Mr. Glick?”

the jibe, if it were that. But he couldn’t do it deftly enough. He had
always been better with the sledgehammer than he was with the foils.
Laurette kept laughing at him, silently and politely, her superiority
piercing Sammy’s pride like banderillas, stinging, hurting  …

wound inside, out of place in his business suit—his running togs. He felt
a little better when he beat George to it by ordering the most expensive
wine in the place. But when it arrived, Laurette looked at it and told the
waiter to send it back. “If you haven’t 1927, don’t bother. That’s the
only good year left.”

Laurette and George danced it with their hands and their heads as well
as their feet, like a professional team. Sammy’s eyes took every step with
her, watched her dancing with her lips parted, her eyes half closed, her
body swaying to the slow rhythm. He thought of the tango partners she
must have left behind, American scions and Georgian princes and titled
Englishmen. Maybe he could get a tango expert to come to the house,
secretly, and then he would get up one evening and surprise Laurette,
that bitch, the woman he loved. If it didn’t take too much time. Though it
might be worth it to make time. He had  nally found a woman worthy of
his ambitions, she was the golden girl, the dream, and the faster he ran
the farther ahead she seemed to be.

Then they returned to the table and Sammy stood up, feeling

challenged and mean, and popped down too quickly again.

“What a beautiful dance,” Laurette said. “You feel wild and free.”
She knew Sammy had never felt wild and free.
The music was back to jazz. Sammy rose jerkily. The manners were

gone. Just the speed, the fury, the one-man battle.

“Come on, let’s dance.”
He held her tight against him, his hand clamped against her bare back,

his  ngers tense and strong on her skin. It was a double satisfaction, the
immediate thrill of her re ned presence so close to Sammy Glick and the
chance that this would reach the columns. He danced a dogged box-step
which he forced her to follow. Both of them felt the struggle of it.

“You even dance like a dynamo,” she said.

“Okay. Wanna quit?” Sammy said.
He was beginning to  nd himself.
“No,” she said. “I’m enjoying it.”
She was. It was terrifying when he held her like that, not trying to be

polite any more. She hadn’t been really terri ed in a long time. To dance
as badly as Sammy and not be ashamed of it set him apart from all the
other men she had ever known.

was gone. The waiter handed her a note:

Decided I couldn’t waste any more time here so I ducked out
to the studio to clean up some work. The bill is taken care of
for the rest of the night. Have fun.

Sammy

“I took a chance,” Sammy said. “And my hunch was right. I had

gone soft on her and she was taking me for as big a sucker as these
studio broads would if you gave them a chance. You know what she
did? She called me at the o ce after that polo player left. Said she
wanted me to come back and talk to her. I told her to meet me at
my place. And she came. What do you think of that, Laurette
Harrington coming over to see me in the middle of the night? We
sat up talking until it got light. I had her all wrong, Al. That
sophisticated stu  is all on the surface. She’s just a sweet, simple kid
at heart …”

All the running Sammy ever did in his life must have been just the

trial laps for those next two months. He wasn’t even around the
o ce very often. He was too busy.

One day we had an appointment at three and he  nally showed a

little after  ve. Irresponsibility was never one of Sammy’s faults so I
suspected something colossal must have happened.

When he  nally came in I knew it was more than merely colossal.

It was so big that even he was overwhelmed. He came in quietly,
underplaying the scene.

“Al,” he said, “have you ever heard of anybody scoring two holes-

in-one the same afternoon?”

He made you play straight for him.
“Well, I’m your man. Only it’s a little more important than golf.

Harrington and I have been sitting in Victor Hugo’s from one until
just now. He’s one of the sweetest guys in the world, Harrington.
And I’m not just saying that because he’s going to be my father-in-
law.”

very happy.”

“You should have seen me,” Sammy said. “I was as nervous as a

whore in church. Thought sure as soon as I broke it to him he was
going to run out and throw Laurette on the  rst plane. You know,
 ne old Southern family and all that crap. But Jesus, he was tickled
to death. In fact he seemed so anxious to marry her o  to me that I
began to wonder whether he was on the skids himself and  gured
the head of a studio was a nice little thing to have in the family.”

“Head of the studio?”
“Yes,” Sammy said. “I did everything I could. But I’m afraid poor

Sidney is out after all.”

“What do you mean afraid?” I said. “Afraid Harrington might

change his mind?”

“Al,” he said, “it’s a good thing I have a sense of humor. Because

if I didn’t you’d have been out on your ear long ago. As a matter of
fact I really went out there and fought for Sidney this afternoon.”

“Arise, Sir Samuel, my true knight,” I said.
“Don’t give me that,” he said. “I’ve got nothing to apologize for. I

kept my word. I told Harrington I’d be willing to work under
Fineman. I couldn’t do any more than that, could I?”

“How should I know?” I said. “And why should you care what I

think, anyway?”

“Listen, Al,” he said, “I’m no dope. I know how long those pals of

mine would stick around if I couldn’t go on doing things for them.
You’re di erent. You never asked me for anything—I mean for
yourself. You’re my only friend. I’m only human. I’m not just a—
dynamo. Every man’s got to have a wife and a friend.”

I still think the guy had something when he said forgive them for

they know not what they do. Nine times out of ten that may be a

virtue. But there is always that tenth time when a strong stand is
needed and softheartedness becomes very  abby behavior. This was
one time when I really had the impulse to break o  diplomatic
relations with Sammy. When he was kni ng his fellow man in the
back he performed with such gusto and brilliance that it fascinated
me as a tour de force. He was so conscientious about being
unscrupulous that you almost had to admire him. But there was
something indecent about this new pose. It was a little too much
like the tycoon who spends the  rst part of his life sucking and
crushing and the last part giving away dimes and Benjamin
Franklin’s advice. I could imagine the Sammy Glick of forty instead
of thirty, with all the sordid details of his career washed from his
mind, reviewing his life like an o cial biographer, believing that
his contribution to mankind has entitled him to friendship, kindness
and peace.

Suddenly he felt he had to justify himself. He insisted upon giving

me a playback of that historic interview with Harrington.

They were sitting in Victor Hugo’s. The orchestra was playing chamber

music, soft and re ned, but the only music for Sammy was Harrington’s
voice.

“Sammy, I’m going East tomorrow. I don’t know whether you realize it

or not, but we’re contemplating some important changes in our
organization out here. We feel your record entitles you to a say in this
reorganization.”

“That’s very kind of you,” Sammy said. “Of course, it’s only fair to tell

you how much I’ve learned from assisting Sidney. He’s been like a father
to me. Everything I know about producing came from him. In fact, he’s
taught me everything he knows.”

“That’s just what I’ve been wondering. Perhaps he has given you all he

has to give. He let too many  ops slip into the program this year.”

“Only a genius can make pictures on an average of one a week

without some turkeys, Mr. Hanington. Sidney is a hard worker. He did
the best he could.”

“I appreciate your sentiments. But, to speak frankly, the purpose of my

visit was to determine whether his best was good enough.”

terri c. But it isn’t entirely his fault if production costs have been too
high.”

“Then you think production costs are too high?”
“You put me in a di cult position, Mr. Harrington. I don’t like to

speak about my superiors. Especially a man like Fineman, who was such
a pioneer in this business. After all, I can remember when I was a kid
seeing his nickelodeons.”

“Naturally, my boy,” Harrington said. “Loyalty is always to be

commended. Always. But our  rst loyalty is to World-Wide, and I
wonder if Fineman isn’t becoming a little too old-fashioned to uphold the
standard of the World-Wide trademark.”

the older producers.”

“And I may have some di culty convincing the Board because you’re so
young. But I’ve made up my mind that what this studio needs is new
leadership. Young blood.”

The waiter came to the table. “Will that be all, Mr. Glick?”
Yes, Sammy thought. I think it will. I think that is just about it, pal.
“No,” he said, “bring Mr. Harrington and me another brandy.”
“To you and Laurette,” said Mr. Harrington.
“And to World-Wide,” Sammy added quickly.

He crossed to the window that looked out over the lot. The studio

street was full of the pretty girls in slacks going home in twos and
threes and carpenters and painters in overalls carrying their
lunchboxes and cat calling to each other; a director exhausted from
the day’s shooting and already worrying with a couple of assistants
about the camera set-ups for the next; a star clowning as he climbs
over the door into his silver Cord; the crazy-quilt processional of
laborers, extras, waitresses, cutters, writers, glamour girls, all the
big cogs and the little ones that must turn together to keep a  lm
factory alive.

“Now it’s mine,” Sammy said. “Everything’s mine. I’ve got

everything. Everybody’s always saying you can’t get everything and
I’m the guy who swung it. I’ve got the studio and I’ve got the
Harrington connections and I’ve got the perfect woman to run my
home and have my children.”

other horror picture. I sat there silently in the shadows, for it was
growing dark and the lights hadn’t been switched on yet and I think
he had forgotten he was talking to me. It was just his voice
reassuring him in the dark.

have everything?”

He began to smile. It became a smirk, a leer.
“It makes me feel kinda  …” And then it came blurting out of

nowhere—“patriotic.”

OceanofPDF.com

The reshu ing at the studio was announced three weeks later

but Sidney Fineman hung around for several months, tying up
threads he had begun. Kit did his last picture. She said it was really
something to see him roll up his sleeves with the enthusiasm of a
kid just breaking in.

“He wasn’t working to make money,” Kit said. “He enjoyed living

well, like anybody else. But that wasn’t the main part. He was a
picture maker. He had pride in his work, like an artist or a
shoemaker. The reason he worked was to make good pictures.”

And it just happened that his last picture turned out to be a

unique kind of hit. It had only two characters, a farmer and his wife,
and somehow it managed to electrify and convince and challenge
and entertain just by following them through their ordinary passions
and defeats and everyday triumphs without any heavies or comedy
reliefs or sub-plots or sub-sub-plots, and the critics didn’t know
whether to call it comedy or tragedy or fantasy but audiences called
it entertainment of a fresh and provocative kind because it had all
three, because a little of all their lives was in it. It might have
earned Fineman a producing berth at one of the other studios, but
somehow or other everybody was saying that it was impossible for
Fineman to do anything as modern as that and most of the credit
was given to Larry Ross, the kid assistant Fineman had upped from
the writers’ ranks. As a matter of fact, as Kit discovered, the source
of this rumor was none other than young Ross himself and
apparently Sammy was glad to give it his stamp of approval because
he was already claiming Ross as one of the protégés he had
developed.

As soon as Fineman moved out of his o ce, Sammy had the wall

to the adjoining room knocked down, to make it larger. Then he

threw out the whole Colonial motif because he said it cramped him.
When the o ce was  nally remodeled it had the intimacy of
Madison Square Garden. The walls were lined with leather and the
solid glass desk looked like a burlesque runway. On one wall was an
oil painting of Laurette, which made her look ten years younger,
even though it had been painted just a few months before. Opposite
her was a large autographed photograph of Harrington.

Because he died so soon after his separation from World-Wide, there
was some talk that Fineman committed suicide, but the Hays O ce
hushed it up so fast that it was impossible to track it down. Of
course, there are less spectacular ways of taking your life than by
gun or gas; there is the slow leak when the will is punctured, what
the poet was trying to say when he spoke of dying of a broken heart.

The papers said Fineman was only  fty-six. I would have guessed

somewhere in the late sixties. The papers also said that he had
recently been forced to resign his post at the studio because of
failing health.

The day after he died a whistle blew in all the studios at eleven

o’clock, a signal for all activity to cease for a full minute of silence
while we rose in memory of Sidney Fineman. At one minute after
eleven another whistle sounded, the signal for us to forget him and
go on about our business again.

But the soul of Sidney Fineman was not let o  that easily.

Hollywood likes its death scenes too well for that. A few days later
they gave Sidney a testimonial dinner at the Ambassador at ten
dollars a plate.

I wanted Kit to go with me, but she held her ground. “I like to

give my testimonials to people before they’re dead,” she said. “I’m
going down to hear Hemingway. He’s raising money for the
Loyalists.”

Mrs. Fineman sat at the table of honor between Sammy and

Harrington, who had just come back to the Coast again to be on
hand for the wedding.

Sammy’s speech had women digging frantically for their

handkerchiefs. In presenting Mrs. Fineman a gold life pass to all
World-Wide pictures, he said, “The greatest regret of my career is
that I had to take the reins from the failing hands of a man who has
driven our coach so long and so successfully. And I can only say that
I would gladly step down from the driver’s seat and walk if I
thought it would bring Uncle Sid back to us again.”

The columnists reported tears in Sammy’s eyes as he sat down.
“Perhaps the camera  ashlights made his eyes water,” I suggested

to Kit.

“No,” she said. “I don’t think it’s at all impossible that those were

real tears. Sammy has the peculiar ability to cry at phony situations
but never at genuine ones.”

“I didn’t think he had any tears in him for any occasion,” I said. “I

thought that well had run dry long ago.”

of letting himself go he just sounds one note over and over again.”

“I know which note that is too,” I said. “Mi mi mi mi …”

The wedding was a beautiful production. It was staged in the garden
beyond the lawn terrace of the estate in Bel Air that Sammy had just
purchased from a famous silent star who had gone broke after the
advent of sound. The wags insisted on calling it Glickfair.

Beyond the garden were the swimming pool and tennis court and

just across the private road a freak three-hole golf-course. The house
itself was of baronial proportions, an interesting example of the
conglomerate style that is just beginning to disappear in Hollywood,
a kind of Persian-Spanish-Baroque-Norman, with some of the
architect’s own ideas thrown in to give it variety.

There were at least a thousand guests milling around—from

Norma Shearer to Julian Blumberg, whose  rst novel had shortened
Hollywood’s memory of his Guild activities.

People were clustered about the garden like bees, buzzing isn’t it

lovely, lovely, just too lovely! The  ower girls were two little child

stars and the bridesmaids who preceded Laurette down the terraced
steps all had famous faces.

whiter than ever. Her red lips and hair against that milky skin, and
the solemnity of the moment as she moved to the funereal rhythm
of the wedding march added to the unreality of the spectacle. She
was a ghastly beauty  oating through the Hollywood mist. She and
Harrington in his striped trousers and top hat were like a satirical
artist’s study of the whole grim business of marriage.

Sheik, both in gray double-breasted vests and afternoon cutaways.
Sammy was staring straight ahead of him, a smile set hard on his
lips as if it were carved there. Sheik kept grinning, obviously a little
lit, taking it big.

All through the marriage ceremony newsreel cameras were

grinding. As Sammy and Laurette were declared man and wife for
better or for worse for richer or for poorer in sickness and in health
till death do them part, a professional mixed chorus suddenly
stepped forward and sang, “Ah, Sweet Mystery of Life.”

After that the crowd broke, moving over to the terrace, where

enormous banquet tables had been set up, manned by the entire
sta  of the Vine Street Derby. Four o ce boys staggered in with a
six-foot-high horseshoe made entirely of gardenias, across which
was strung a white silk banner with gold letters, “Long Life and
Happiness Always.”

Everybody seemed to agree that this was the greatest wedding

Hollywood ever had. “Even bigger than the MacDonald-Raymond,” I
heard someone say. And I could almost see the Megaphone
proclaiming: GLICK NUPTIALS HIT ALL-TIME HIGH!

When it  nally let out at dusk Kit was in a restless mood. “Let me

drive,” she said. “I feel as if I want to do something. I wonder how
long it will be before the world looks back on that the way we do at
African rituals.”

We drove out to the ocean and up along the coast. It was quiet,

relaxing, good to be alone. “Isn’t that our cove?” I said.

and we started down. It was a night without stars. The tide was high
and the wind whipped in o  the water.

waves, cold but comfortable. We discovered one solitary light
moving slowly along the horizon. We played with it. It was a
rumrunner and we had the plot of a B-picture. It was a ghost ship, a
derelict, and we had mystery. It was the Japanese  shermen who
put out from Terminal Island before the sun is up, and we had
realism.

of the waves pounding down. There was a long moment when we
no longer heard the ocean roar. Then we were listening to it louder
than ever.

We didn’t feel like going home, going inside anywhere, so we

drove down to Ocean Park and strolled out on the amusement pier.
Public dancehalls with the girls coming alone in cheap evening
dresses, and the barrel passageway where a woman screams with
embarrassment and delight as her dress suddenly blows up around
her face, the Krazy House full of electric shocks and trap doors in
the dark—a ten-cent introduction to a harmless form of masochism
—the guy showing o  to his girl by knocking all the bottles over
with a baseball, and necking in the boat that moves foolishly along
through dark tunnels, all the screwy, healthy releases that don’t cost
too much, the cheap thrills people will probably always get a kick
out of.

Kit insisted on going on the roller coaster seven times, sitting in

the front seat, rising high over the ocean and then diving down,
down past the Ferris wheel and the revolving airplanes and the
merry-go-round, past the crowd  ashing by like a crazy pan shot,
heading straight for the water and then at the last possible moment
swishing up into the sky.

“I have a wonderful idea,” Kit said, as she tried to get me on for

the eighth time. “During my lunch hour I’m going over to Mines
Field and take  ying lessons.”

“The hell you are,” I said. “I forbid it.”

you forbid it?”

“I absolutely refuse to let you take the chance,” I said.
“Al, you’re getting awfully possessive lately,” she said. “You’re

beginning to act as if I were married to you.”

“That settles it,” I said.
“Settles what?”
“Our marriage.”
“Now, Al, if it’s just a question of living together …”
“It’s a question of marrying you,” I said. “I am not going to let

you take another ride on that damn thing. I’m getting dizzy. I want
to marry you. I want you to quit this funny business and come along
like a good girl and get married.”

a license.”

in Tiajuana. All you need is  ve bucks and a woman. We can come
back in the morning.”

“And who do we think we’re eloping from? People out here are
always sneaking o  to get married when there’s no one around even
vaguely interested in trying to stop them. And anyway, I hate
Tijuana. It’s just a little outhouse for San Diego.”

“What do we care what Tiajuana looks like?” I said. “We won’t

even see Tiajuana. Let’s just jump in the car and start down. We can
get there in four hours—they may still be open.”

“I always feel sorry for couples who have to get drunk in the

small hours of the morning before they can work up courage enough
to run o  and get married. As if they’re afraid that any moment
they’ll sober up and change their minds. Let’s just go down quietly
to the City Hall and get it over with.”

“Kit!” I said. “Darling! Jesus! Kiss me.”

“You fool,” she said. “Not out here.”
We did.

celebrate.”

on the beach and swim and drink tequila and carry on right out in
the open if we feel like it and forget all about Hollywood until we
have to come back.”

And forget all about Sammy Glick, I thought, the four-star, super-

colossal, marriage-to-end-all-marriages of Sammy Glick.

I realized that neither of us had said a word about Sammy’s

marriage since we left that spectacle behind us. But somehow what
had happened to us was bound up with that marriage.

It was about one o’clock and we were sitting in the kitchenette
talking and drinking beer when the phone rang. Kit went to answer
it. She called me, handing the phone over signi cantly.

“It’s for you. And you’ll never guess who.”
I thought of Sammy, installed in his canopied French Empire bed

making love to three million dollars. ”

“ ’Lo, Al. Busy?”
His words came quick and sharp as ever, but there was a hollow-

ness, a ring of humility I had never heard before.

“Sammy! For God’s sake! What do you want?”
“Al, I want you to come over. I want to talk to you.”
“Tonight? Now? Are you crazy?”
“Do me a favor and come over.”
“Jesus Christ, do you know what time it is?”
“It isn’t much after one o’clock.”
“But what about Laurette?”
“Come on over, Al. Please.”
I tried to think if I had ever heard him say that word before.
“Hold on a minute, Sammy.”
I looked up at Kit. “He wants me to come over. What the hell does

he think I am?”

“He knows what you are, darling. That’s why he called you.”

“I’d love to know what it’s about.”
“Go ahead. I ought to be reading a script, anyway. Duty calls,

Boswell.”

destiny of Sammy Glick gripping me again.

“O.K.,” I said into the mouthpiece. “Keep your pants on. I’m

coming.”

I could see the house as I turned in the Bel Air gate. It stood up

there on top of a hill like a feudal castle. Bright lights from every
room cast their yellow geometric shafts out into the black night.

Sammy must have been standing behind it waiting for me. Behind
him was a spacious hallway suitable to a public building, with a
curving marble stairway and elaborate chandeliers that seemed to
dwarf him. He was wearing a silk monogrammed smoking jacket
over his dress trousers. In his hand was an almost empty highball
glass. I had never seen him drunk before.

As I entered he grabbed my hand feverishly. His palm was damp.

“Thanks, Tootsie. What took you so long?”

It had only been  fteen minutes from the time he called.
I followed Sammy through one bright and costly room after

another until we reached the bar. He seemed to be su ering from a
severe shock, terrifyingly becalmed, like an injured motorist
wandering around after a bloody collision.

the bar he blurted, “Goddam it, I just didn’t have the guts to stick it
out here alone tonight. I went through the house and turned all the
lights on. I kept the radio going full blast. I sat at the bar and tried
to get myself stinko. No dice. I was talking to myself. I was going
nuts. Jesus, Al, you’re easygoing. You’re sane. Talk to me, Al. Keep
me from going nuts.”

“When did she leave?” I said.
“How’d you know?” he asked anxiously.
“Doesn’t take a Philo Vance.”
“Oh,” he said, and he looked relieved. “I thought maybe it was

out already. There’s so goddam much talk in this town. You’ve got

to promise not to let it get out. I’ll ruin you in this town if you ever
let it out.”

“Balls with that ruining-me-in-this-town stu ,” I said.
He came out from behind the bar and stood in front of me

apologetically.

saying. I know you’re regular, Al. You never tried to bitch me out of
anything. I can talk to you. That’s why I got you over. If I can only
talk it out, I’ll feel better, you know, get it out of my system. Like
puking.”

His damp hands wiped up and down his face. Then his

conversation went on jerkily and I had the impression that it was
out of sync with the movement of his lips.

“After the wedding, a goddam madhouse. Nothing but

champagne. Twenty- ve hundred bucks’ worth down the drain.
People cockeyed all over the joint. Can’t  nd Laurette. Make a
goddam fool of myself asking everybody if they seen Laurette. Then
upstairs in the guest room … Jesus Christ, with that new punk I just
signed, Carter Judd …”

glass.

“Judd ducked out as I came in. But she just pulled herself together

and waited for me. Just waited for me as if it was nothing at all.”

his wounded pride. His features became so ugly and distorted I
knew I was going to see him cry. He started to say, “I can’t
believe … I thought …” and the tears came, forming foolishly in the
corners of his  erce little eyes. I wondered why I thought of
surrealism when I saw him cry and then I remembered the Dali
exhibit of rain falling inside a taxicab. This was no less bizarre, no
less grotesque. Sammy’s tears were rain falling inside a taxicab.

little sobs he tried so futilely to choke. But he couldn’t hold it any
longer and the dam broke and the tears  owed over. He tried to blot
his face with his handkerchief and when the  ow could no longer be

checked that way he sat down on the stool with his elbows on the
bar and cried into his nervous little hands.

looked, so he spoke through his  ngers latticed against his face.
Before his speech had been nervous broken discords. Now his words
came haltingly, absently, one at a time.

broad, maybe. But when a high-class girl like her, a lady, an
aristocrat …”

calculating marriage for position. It did not have to be. He had
fallen in love with position, with the name and the power of
Harrington, and it came to him not as something sordid and cold
but as love, as deep respect for Laurette’s upbringing and attraction
to her personality and desire for her body.

He paused a long time, the glibness gone. In his mouth was the

thick, sour taste of defeat, and distress was ugly on him. He was
sweating with strain and the shame of it.

“It wasn’t so much what I saw. Hell, we were all drunk and

kidding around. It was how she spoke to me, just stood there like a
haughty bitch, saying  …” His hands began to massage his face
slowly again. “Jesus, I’ll never forget what she said …”

He balanced a desperate moment on the threshold, swaying, his eyes

bulging, terribly sober.

She came forward, straight at him, smoothing out her dress, the lovely

cream satin wedding gown that Princess Pignatelli would be gushing over
in her society column next morning.

Her voice was vicious and low, drunken and passionate. Ugly and

hoarse to Sammy. “Well?” she said.

He waited for her to alibi, plead, weep, swear, apologize. But that was

all she said. He waited for her to wilt beneath his righteous (and
horri ed, and frightened) stare, but she only stood there, proud and
composed, stately and perverse and cruelly self-possessed. These were the

elements he had loved and admired, and suddenly he hated them, he
wanted to hide from them.

have you got to gasp about? You’ve got what you want. And Dad’s got
what he wants. And little Laurie’s going to get what she wants.”

air like a skywriter’s. “What are you talking about?”

“Now listen, dear,” she said. “We’re going to see a lot of each other.

What’s the use of trying to fool ourselves? I know why you married me—
for the same reason you do everything else. And don’t worry—I won’t let
you down. I’ll be the best hostess this town ever had. I’ll handle this pan
of the business, and I’ll be careful, I won’t let my private life interfere
with your career. Only you and I just signed a contract—the same goes
both ways.”

companionship of Kit, he had wanted the domesticity of Ruth Mintz and
the glamour of Rita Royce, and he had thought he was getting the drop
on all of them (and something more, something indispensable) in
Laurette Harrington.

sail, tightening up, and when he answered her his voice was screwed
down hard, cold and metallic.

“Sure. But the joint is lousy with snoopy columnists, that’s all. You

want it to look right, don’t you? Now go on back to the party and stay
out of the two-shots. Unless they’re with me.”

she came forward to take his frenzied little face in her hands and kiss it
on the forehead as if they had been married twenty years.

“All right, dear,” she said.

He was imitating her voice.” ‘All right, dear.’ That was just the

way she said it, ‘All right, dear.’ ”

“Where is she, now?” I said.
His shoulders rose and fell in a hopeless shrug. “How the hell do I

know? With that Judd bastard, I suppose. I can keep him in louse

parts till he’s a dead pigeon in pictures. But where will that get me?
There’ll be others. They’ll be around her like  ies, the sons-of-
bitches. And the night I made her I thought I was the greatest guy in
the world. Why, she’s a … Why, she’s nothing but a high-class …”

Ah, sweet mystery of life, at last I’ve found you, I sang to myself,

in a small clear voice. Ah, at last I know the secret of it all …

do, Al? What would you do if you were me?”

“Sammy,” I said, “I’d like to help you, but that’s a very

hypothetical question. I wouldn’t want to be in your shoes.”

hate my guts just like all the rest of them.”

It was said without antagonism. Spoken regretfully.
“No,” I said, “that isn’t quite true. If you want to know what I

really think—I think you couldn’t help yourself. With you it was a
choice of being a nice guy and a  op or the way you are now. No, I
guess you didn’t even have that choice. The world decided it for
you.”

“Don’t give me that double-talk,” he said. “I’m in a spot. No

kidding, what would you do?”

“Sammy,” I said, “all I can tell you is that I’d pull out of this set-

up so fast …”

back into his body again.

“By God, I will! I’ll start moving out right now. By the time that

bitch gets back in the morning she won’t even  nd a collar-button
lying around this dump. I’ll get Charles out of bed. I’ll call the
chau eur …”

He started running across the room. Then suddenly he stopped

and stared ahead, staring at something that wasn’t there, like a
sleepwalker.

“Oh, Jesus,” he said.
“Now, what?”
“I wonder how walking out on his daughter will hit old man

Harrington?”

arrived.”

“But Christ,” Sammy complained, “you never know how you

stand in this crazy business. Take that kid Ross, for instance. He’s
got something on the ball. But I don’t like him. Don’t trust him. He’s
a smart-aleck. I can see already he thinks he knows more than I do.
And who the hell knows, maybe he does. But with Harrington in my
corner …”

I could see the future running through his mind like ticker tape:

Mr. and Mrs. Glick entertain Morgan partners … Mr. and Mrs. Glick
 y east to spend Christmas at famous Harrington estate … Among
those seen at ringside tables after the opening were Samuel Glick
and his lovely wife the former Laurette Harrington dazzling in white
sequins and ermine … Just good friends says Laurette Glick of Clark
Judd of Freddie Epson of Maurice del Rios … Utterly ridiculous says
Mrs. Glick of separation rumors … Cheap gossip says Samuel Glick
in Chicago alone for studio convention … Harrington millions said
to be behind Glick Productions  …  Mr. and Mrs. Glick request the
pleasure of …

“Sammy,” I said as I stood up, “I hope you and Laurette will be

very happy.”

I started to leave.
“Stick around,” Sammy said, and he picked up the phone on the

end of the bar.

“Hello, Sheik …!” He laughed loudly. “I did! Well, bring her over

here, ask her if she’s got a friend.… No, it’s no gag.… Goddam right
I mean it … No, not her, she always tells me what a great actress
she is and she’s all washed up, and she’s a lousy lay,
anyway … Jesus, what the hell good are you? Sure, sure I know you
can’t get me an Academy Winner at two o’clock in the
morning … Ha, ha, ha … Hey, wait a minute!”

He turned to me energetically. “Hey, Al, remember Billie, the

redhead I  xed you up with at the Back Lot a long time ago? I

wouldn’t mind some of that tonight. Haven’t got her phone number
by any chance?”

“She’s turned pro,” I said. “She’s working out of Gladys’s.”
“Hell,” he said. “I like to roll my own. I was going to make that

dame open up tonight.”

satis ed to take her this way. Because I happen to know the only
way you’d ever get to Billie is pay as you enter. You’ll never be able
to understand it, but Billie is folks. Billie is a very moral lady.”

going to get my money’s worth!”

I thought of Foxy Four Eyes’s back room on the occasion of

Sammy’s introduction to the orgasmic mysteries, the day he learned
to value the act of love in terms of money’s worth.

“Hello, Sheik,” he said. “To hell with your dogs. Drop by Gladys’s

and pick up Billie Rand.… No, don’t pick up anything else. Ha, ha,
ha … okay, sweetheart.”

way out, and stopped.

“What’s your hurry? Hang around a while. We’re going to have

some laughs.”

and I are getting married this week.”

when I called, but I wasn’t sure. Well, all I can say is you’re a lucky
guy, Al. She’s a great girl.”

He said it with a memory, with a touch of remorse and I knew

what he was thinking, that he would have liked to have her, that he
would have liked to have someone, but it was impossible, it was
absolutely physically, psychologically, economically impossible.

“Well, I’m tickled to death. We’ll have to get together and kill a

case of champagne some night.”

He walked me to the door and then he left the door open and

walked me to my car. He could not bear to be alone. He put one
foot on the running board and leaned through the window.

don’t know what the hell got into me for a minute. What the hell
have I got to kick about? I feel great. I got the world by the balls.
Keep in touch with me, sweetheart.”

There in the silence I could almost hear the motor in him

beginning to pick up speed again.

As I drove o  I saw him standing outside on his palatial stone

steps, under his giant eucalyptus trees, looking out over his hundred
yards of landscaping that terraced down to the wall that surrounded
his property. He was a lonely little  gure in the shadows of
Glickfair, the terrible little conqueror, the poor little guy, staring
after my car as it drove out through the main gates, waiting for
Sheik to bring the girls and the laughter.

I drove back slowly, heavy with the exhaustion I always felt after

being with Sammy too long. I thought of him wandering alone
through all his brightly lit rooms. Not only tonight, but all the
nights of his life. No matter where he would ever be, at banquets, at
gala house parties, in crowded night clubs, in big poker games, at
intimate dinners, he would still be wandering alone through all his
brightly lit rooms. He would still have to send out frantic S.O.S.’s to
Sheik, that virile eunuch: Help! Help! I’m lonely. I’m nervous. I’m
friendless. I’m desperate. Bring girls, bring Scotch, bring laughs.
Bring a pause in the day’s occupation, the quick sponge for the
sweaty marathoner, the recreational pause that is brief and vulgar
and titillating and quickly forgotten, like a dirty joke.

I thought how, unconsciously, I had been waiting for justice

suddenly to rise up and smite him in all its vengeance, secretly
hoping to be around when Sammy got what was coming to him;
only I had expected something conclusive and fatal and now I
realized that what was coming to him was not a sudden pay-o  but a
process, a disease he had caught in the epidemic that swept over his
birthplace like plague; a cancer that was slowly eating him away,
the symptoms developing and intensifying: success, loneliness, fear.
Fear of all the bright young men, the newer, fresher Sammy Glicks
that would spring up to harass him, to threaten him and  nally to
overtake him.

the  rst idea of give-and-take, the social intercourse. It had to be all
you, all the way. You had to make individualism the most
frightening ism of all. You act as if the world is just a blindfold free-
for-all. Only the  rst time you get it in the belly you holler
brotherhood. But you can’t have your brothers and eat them too.
You’re alone, pal, all alone. That’s the way you wanted it, that’s the
way you learned it. Sing it, Sammy, sing it deep and sad, all alone
and feeling blue, all alone in crowded theaters, company
conventions, all alone with twenty of Gladys’s girls tying themselves
into lewd knots for you. All alone in sickness and in health, for
better or for worse, with power and with Harringtons till death parts
you from your only friend, your worst enemy, yourself.

But what good are words when not even experience will

regenerate? It was too late to hate him or change him. Sammy’s will
had sti ened. It had been free for an instant at birth, poised bird-
free in the doctor’s hand that moment in the beginning before it
began to be formed to the life-molds, the terrible hungers of body
and brain, the imposed wants, the traditional oppressions and
persecutions, until at last Sammy’s will had curled in on itself, like
an ingrown hair festering, spreading infection.

Now Sammy’s career meteored through my mind in all its

destructive brilliance, his blitzkrieg against his fellow men. My mind
skipped from conquest to conquest, like the scrapbook on his
exploits I had been keeping ever since that memorable birthday
party at the Algonquin. It was a terrifying and wonderful document,
the record of where Sammy ran, and if you looked behind the
picture and between the lines you might even discover what made
him run. And some day I would like to see it published, as a
blueprint of a way of life that was paying dividends in America in
the  rst half of the twentieth century.

OceanofPDF.com

THE SAMMY GLICK

SHORT STORIES

OceanofPDF.com

AUTHOR’S NOTE

What could connect Dartmouth College and a Vermont marble strike
with the novel What Makes Sammy Run? They would seem to be a
continent apart. But actually, without the former, the latter might
never have materialized. It happened like this:

In the mid-thirties, as student editor of The (daily) Dartmouth, I

was shoulder-deep if not over my head in the story of the
marbleworkers’ union’s struggle for a living wage against the quarry
owners, who turned out to be generous, longtime supporters of the
college, the Proctor family of Proctor, Vermont. I wrote and featured
on our front page a series of articles describing the lives of the
families of the marbleworkers, pulling out all stops and not having
to exaggerate, since the kids were hungry, the clothes threadbare,
and the company houses drafty through bitter winters.

The series had set o  an angry confrontation between

spontaneous sympathizers with the strike and indignant defenders of
the Proctors. To the friendlies, I was an undergraduate John Reed,
and to the opposition a traitor to my college and my class. And I
don’t mean the Class of ’36. President Ernest Martin Hopkins
showed me drawersful of letters demanding my expulsion. The
right-wing alumni and the American Legion seemed to think
expulsion was much too good for me.

In the midst of this storm in a Dartmouth teacup, Bennett Cerf,

the celebrated president of Random House, came to Hanover to
deliver one of his joke-studded lectures. He phoned me at The
Dartmouth o ce and asked if I would drop over to see him at the
end of the day. Actually our “day” ended at three or four in the
morning, when we put the paper to bed, but the Hanover Inn was a
scant hundred yards away, so I dropped over around suppertime to
meet the famous Mr. Cerf.

reading my marble-strike series, was impressed with both the style
and content, and wanted to know more about my work. I told him
that I had been writing a number of short stories for the campus
literary magazine, and also a one-act play, Company Town, based on
my experiences in Proctor. The state troopers, blatantly taking the
side of the quarry owners, had actually stopped and turned back our
trucks delivering food and clothing to the besieged families. (Ah, the
bad old thirties!) It was excellent material, and I had made the most
of it.

told him I was going back to Hollywood to work for David Selznick
as a reader/junior writer, but I intended to keep my hand in as a
short-story writer. “Good,” the ebullient, ever-optimistic head of
Random House said. “If you ever have a novel in mind, we’d be
interested. Come and see us.”

Selznick, I got my short-story career in gear very quickly. In my  rst
two years out of college, I managed to sell stories to The Saturday
Evening Post, Collier’s, Story, Esquire—and Liberty. It was in that
quirky mass-market magazine that I  rst published, in short-story
form, “What Makes Sammy Run?” It was so well received that
Liberty asked for another Sammy story and I came up with “Love
Comes to Sammy Glick.”

Liberty stories and asked if I saw them as the seeds of a Hollywood
novel. In truth, I was in the process of making notes along that line.
I was introduced to Saxe Commins, a warm and sympathetic editor,
who encouraged me to leave Hollywood  lm-writing and come east
to write the book. With a $250 advance (against the muni cent
total of $500) I was on my way. I holed up in Norwich, Vermont,
just across the Connecticut River from Dartmouth, and, with outline
in hand, began banging away. In less than a year the job was done.

From time to time, I would run out of money and have to stop for

a short story to pay the rent and support a young wife and baby
daughter. The novel was published on my twenty-seventh birthday,

with pre-pub praise from Scott Fitzgerald and John O’Hara. Bennett
had warned me that while he, Saxe, and everybody else at Random
House was enthusiastic about the book, I should not expect much of
a sale. People who read, they felt, don’t buy “Hollywood” novels.

But Sammy fooled all of us. With a rave from The New York Times,

from Dorothy Parker, on coast-to-coast radio from Walter Winchell,
and from Damon Runyon, in his salute to Sammy as “the all-
American heel,” the book went into eight printings before
publication and was the choice of book-review editors as “Best First
Novel of the Year.” The hardcover sale went over  fty thousand and
the countless paperback editions have sent the circulation into the
millions. To my amazement, Sammy Glick is as well known today as
he was in 1941 when he  rst struck terror in the hearts of the
Hollywood tycoons.

The two short stories that follow are republished in their original

form, the  rst using dialogue without quotation marks, a stylized or
stylish experiment I was drawn to, perhaps from reading Saroyan
and other groundbreakers in the thirties.

For the sake of literary history, if that doesn’t sound too pompous,

I have left the secondary characters’ names as they were in the
original stories. Al Manners, the laid-back narrator who becomes
obsessed with Sammy’s ruthless climb to the top, becomes Al
Manheim in the novel. Eugene Spitzer, the nebbish whose story
Sammy steals for his breakthrough to Hollywood, becomes Julian
Blumberg. Geo rey Boyce, the digni ed studio head whose place
Sammy usurps, becomes Sidney Fineman. I believe the reason for
these changes was to counter the possible charge of anti-Semitism.
Since Sammy is obviously Jewish, I thought it should be clear that
nearly all his victims—Rosalie, Manheim, Blumberg, Fineman, his
brother, Israel—were also Jewish, suggesting the wide range of
personalities and attitudes under the one ethnic umbrella.

B.S     

OceanofPDF.com

“WHAT MAKES SAMMY RUN?”

Al sat with a friend in a booth at the Vine Street Brown Derby
watching the people watch each other.

It’s a funny thing, Al said, if you watch an animal while it eats, it

stops. But here in the Derby several hundred people pay, and pay
well, for the privilege of being watched while they eat.

Al is a writer. He writes scenarios, but he could say that because

he worked on a newspaper for ten years, and he didn’t forget it. He
remembered going down to New York and begging for a job,
making a pest of himself because he needed twenty dollars a week
to be a man in this world. Al was getting  ve hundred now. That
was because he had no push. He seemed content with being small
fry. He was lazy. He would never get anywhere. When other writers
gave him good ideas for stories he would give them credit. He was a
washout.

A big man with a fat body carefully hidden in smartly tailored

clothes stopped at the table. He squeezed Al’s hand a ectionately.

Saw your picture, Al, he said. Tuhri c!
And he pressed his pudgy hand against Al’s as if to indicate that

further expression failed him.

That’s the original phony, Al said, as the fat man left his table to

squeeze somebody else’s hand. I happen to know he told Sol Morris
my picture stinks.

Al looked around at the new star who had just come in with her

husband and her lover, at the too- attering caricatures of
Hollywood celebrities on the wall, at the too-revealing starched
uniforms of the waitresses.

Sometimes I feel if I passed my hand over all this it would topple

down like a house of cards, Al said. Just like that. P    ft.

the paper. He was  fteen years old, a little ferret of a kid, sharp and
quick. Sammy Glick. Used to run copy for me. Always ran. Always
looked thirsty.

I’m the new o ce boy, but I ain’t going to be an o ce boy long.

Don’t say ain’t, I said, or you’ll be an o ce boy forever.
Thanks, Mr. Manners, he said; that’s why I took this job so I can

be around writers and learn all about grammar and how to act right.

Get the hell out of here, I said.
He raced out too quickly; a little ferret. Smart kid, I thought.

Smart little kid. He made me uneasy. I guess I’ve always been afraid
of people who can be agile without grace.

In three weeks Sammy did more running around that o ce than

Paavo Nurmi in his whole career. It made me feel great. Every time
I gave him a page of copy, he’d run o  with it as if his life depended
on it. I can still see Sammy racing through the o ce.

I guess he knew what he was doing. The world was a race to

Sammy. He was running against time.

Sometimes I used to sit at the bar and say, Al, I don’t give a good

damn if you never move from this seat again. If you never write
another line. I default. If it’s a race, you can scratch my name right
now. Al Manners does not choose to run. And it would run through
my head like that, What makes Sammy run? What makes Sammy
run? Does he know where he’s going? I asked one of the reporters:

Say, Tony, what makes Sammy run?
You’re drunk, Al, he said. How the hell do I know?
But I’ve got to know, I told him. It’s important. Don’t you see? It’s

the answer to everything.

You’re nuts, he said.
Three weeks later I had my  rst run-in with Sammy Glick.
Those were the days when I was writing my drama column and I

used to bat it out around four o’clock and then go over to Mac and
Charlie’s and forget.

One morning a storm from the general direction of the city editor

blew at me.

Why in hell don’t you look what you’re doing? he said.
What’s eating you? I said cagily.
That column you turned in last night, he said. It didn’t make

sense. You left all the verbs out of the last paragraph. If it hadn’t
been for that kid Sammy Glick it would have run the way you wrote
it.

What’s Sammy Glick got to do with it? I said, getting sore.
Everything, he said. He read it on his way to the linotypers. So he

sat right down and rewrote the paragraph. And damned well, too.

That’s great, I said. He’s a great kid.
A few minutes later I came face to face with Samuel Glick himself.

Nice work, I said.

Oh, that’s all right, he said.
Listen, wise guy, I said. If you found something wrong with my

stu , why didn’t you come and tell me? You knew where I was.

Sure, he said, but I didn’t think we had time.
But you had time to show it to the city editor  rst, I said. Smart

boy.

Gee, Mr. Manners, he said, I’m sorry. I just wanted to help you.
You did, I said.
Sammy seemed very satis ed. Don’t you think it’s dangerous to

drop so many verbs? he said. You might hit somebody down below.

Listen, I said. Tell me one thing. How the hell can you read when

you’re running so fast?

That’s how I learned to read, he said—while I was running

errands.

It made me sore. He was probably right. Somebody called him

and he spun around and started running. What makes Sammy Glick
run? I pondered. It must have something to do with centrifugal
force, only deeper.

the bar. The telephone rang for me. It was Sammy. He said, The
boss says your column is four inches short.

What the hell, I said. Tell him I’ll be right up.
You don’t have to worry, he said. I took care of it myself.
You, I said stupidly. I knew he had me.

Sure, Al, he said. I dashed o  a four-inch radio column to  ll, and

the boss liked it.

me? Why don’t you just take over my column?

I just wanted to help you, he said.
Sure, I said, Joe Altruist, and hung up.
But the pay-o  came the next morning. I had just started on the

column when the city editor came over.

From now on write it six inches shorter, he said.
O.K. by me, I said, if you can give me one good reason.
From now on we’re using Sammy Glick’s radio column, he said.
You mean Sammy Glick the copy boy? I asked.
No, I mean Sammy Glick the radio columnist, he said. His stu 

looked good today.

Maybe you’d like to know he copied the  rst paragraph from

Somerset Maugham, I said.

Maybe that’s where you need to go for your stu , he said.
So that’s how Sammy got his start. He was smart enough never to

crib from the same writer twice. When it came to wisecracks, he
rolled his own. I hated him so much I began to admire him. Every
other copy boy was a nice guy. At least if you bent over, they’d ask
you to stand up and turn around before stabbing you.

But I began to see what made Sammy run. Though I couldn’t see

just then where he was running.

months he came up to me one day and said, Say, Al, next Monday is
my birthday, and since you sorta gave me my start I thought maybe
you’d like to have dinner with my girl and me at the Algonquin.

I’ll never forget that girl, or the day either, and there’s a real story

in that too. Everything Sammy did was a story. That’s why I’m
telling you all this. Because Sammy is a genius, one of our big
Americans, Napoleon in a double-breasted suit. Some day he’s going
to lie in a museum, stu ed, labeled: THIS IS SAMMY GLICK. IN AN AGE THAT COULD

NEVER STOP RUNNING, HE RAN THE FASTEST.

legged, thin, pale, vague little girl. She would have been an angel,
only her face was made up like an actress, heavy red lipstick and
eye shadow and too much powder. I wanted to take my
handkerchief and wipe it all o . The poor little kid. The blue eyes
and the frail body and the sad look were hers. They grew out of the
shadow of the tenement right up through the crowded sidewalk.
There was a little of the gutter and a little of the sky in her. I could
see her staying after school, lost somewhere between the two covers
of a book.

sill, looking up at the stars, clean stars, high over a Hundred and
Eighteenth Street.

column next to mine.

Oh, Sammy has told me so much about you, she said.
Sammy smiled. We walked into the Algonquin lobby. He was

nineteen years old.

Dinner was what I would have called uneventful. Sammy was

almost too busy looking for celebrities to pay much attention to
either of us. Miss Goldbaum was shy, very sweet and frankly
una ected. Except when she talked about Sammy. And I encouraged
her. Perhaps I had been misjudging Sammy, I thought. Perhaps
there was another side to him. He was a thoughtful lover, and
slowed down to a walk for Miss Goldbaum.

Sammy wants to do.

Of course not, I said; they forced it on him.
He just does that to make a living, she said.
It’s a damn shame, I said.
But he writes me the loveliest things, she said, and some day he’s

going to be a great writer. Because he’s a poet.

Sammy was looking across the room at George S. Kaufman. He

was lost in thought. Miss Goldbaum edged her hand into his.
Sammy played with it absentmindedly, like a piece of silverware.

can’t believe it, so artistic and everything, and him just a little kid
right out of the Bronx.

craving to live and her blood beating to possess and to be maternal
found expression in this one little smart ass. She had little pointed
breasts, miserable and sad, and they seemed to me to be reaching
out for Sammy, the way black-eyed Susans tilt themselves toward
the sun. She was boring me. So I caught George Kaufman’s eye, and
he came over, and was introduced, and had a drink with us.

wisecrack Kaufman. He was obsequious, sniveling, unsure of himself
and very bold. It would have been funny, only I had seen Sammy
too long.

Kaufman stayed only a few minutes, and soon Miss Goldbaum

yawned, and I said I had a lot of work to do before getting to bed,
and Sammy looked at Miss Goldbaum and said, We both appreciate
your celebrating this way with us. She nodded. Yes, Sammy said it
exactly right. And they were gone, walking down the steps to the
subway arm in arm.

When I turned to Winchell’s column next morning there it was,

the bold-face print laughing up at me:

When rising critic Sammy Glick celebrated his nineteenth
birthday yesterday at the Algonquin, Al Manners and George
Kaufman were on hand as principal cake eaters.

You didn’t have to be a mastermind to  gure out how Walter got

that item, and when Sammy came in I gave him one of my searching
looks.

I see where Kaufman got himself a plug in Winchell’s column, I

said.

Yeah, Sammy cracked, you should have been there.
Listen, Samuel, I came back. You got enough gall to be divided

into nine parts.

desk. I gotta spread my wings a little.

disgrace to the rodent family.

Listen, he cracked. She gets a break three times a week.
You … stink, I ended lamely. I was too sore to be smart.
O.K. by me, he said, walking o . Some day you’ll cut o  an arm

for one little whi .

came in with a manuscript under his arm and asked for Mr. Glick.
He had written a radio script, and since Mr. Glick was an expert on
radio he thought maybe Mr. Glick would be so kind as to read his
stu .

he had ever talked before. I could feel at that moment something
loud and strong pumping inside that little guy, like a piston,
twisting him up and forcing him on.

After the tall guy had gone, Sammy sat down and read the stu .

He smiled as he read it, and when he hit the third page he laughed
out loud.

Hey, this is good stu , he said; funny as hell.
What’s it about? I asked doubtfully.
Brand-new angle, he said. The guy won’t have anything to do

with the girl. So she kidnaps him. But he still says nix and gets her
arrested. In the court it looks like curtains for her, but they clinch
and decide to get married, and the babe is saved because he’s the
only witness and a guy can’t testify against his own wife. Pretty hot!

The guy who wrote it came back the next week.
You have an idea here, Sammy told him. Of course it’s rough, and

it needs developing, but maybe with a little work we could  x it up,
he said.

You mean you’ll help me! said the dope.
I think I can pull something out of it, Sammy said, and then I’ll

give it to my agent.

Say, I didn’t expect all this, said the dope.

agent for me? I want to sell this story to Hollywood. I got the title
all doped out—Girl Steals Boy.

Why not Leland Heyward? He only manages Hepburn and a

couple of dozen other stars, I said.

Is he good on stories? Sammy asked.
Pretty fair, I said. He makes a couple of thousand a week out of

them.

Well, I’ll think it over.
I thought that was the end of it. It should have been, if life didn’t

confound us ordinary sleep-and-eat people by producing geniuses
like Sammy Glick. Life is choppy, full of rip tides and sudden
breakers, and some guys scream once and go down, and others  ght
their way to the surface and still go down. Some have water wings;
they have a genius for self-preservation. It’s them we see when we
raise our water-logged heads above the foam,  oating, just  oating
over us as nice as you please—Sammy Glicks, every one of them.

Two weeks later Sammy rushed in, exultant and jumpy.
Shake hands with God’s gift to Hollywood, he said, grabbing my

hand before I had time to stick it in my pocket.

Don’t use the name of the Lord in vain, I said. You mean you sold

that story?

but this is my  rst story.

It’s a disgrace, I said,  ve thousand.
Well, that’s just the  rst, he said, and there’s plenty more ideas

where this one came from.

You mean from the guy who wrote this one, I said.
Aw, he said, he had nothing on the ball but a prayer. He’s lucky I

bothered with him.

Like Miss Goldbaum, I said quietly.
And all of a sudden I hated Sammy Glick. Before, I had been

annoyed, or disturbed, or just revolted. This was one hundred
percent American hatred.

The next morning I read something in the  lm section of the

morning paper that revealed the  ne Bronx hand of Sammy Glick:

story to Colossal for $10,000. Titled Girl Steals Boy, this is the  rst
of a series Colossal has contracted for, according to Mr. Glick.
Collaborating with him was Eugene Spitzer.

What I can’t understand, I thought, is how Eugene Spitzer ever got
mentioned at all. I was very bitter. All of a sudden I was jealous of
Sammy Glick, and congratulating myself on not being like him.

One day, a week later, Sammy didn’t show up at all. Maybe he’s

sick, I thought at  rst, but I quickly discounted this optimism. Guys
like Sammy Glick don’t get sick, unless it helps them get out of a
contract, or lands them an insurance payment. The afternoon
passed.

Sammy came in around suppertime. He wore a new suit. He also

wore a new expression. I liked it even less than the old stock. He
had a blue check shirt and a red carnation in his buttonhole. He
held a cigarette loosely between his  ngers. My Sammy Glick, my
little copy boy.

Hello, Obnoxious, I said.
I came in to say good-bye. Sammy said. I’m o  for Hollywood.
How did this happen? I asked. Metro wire that they just couldn’t

get along another day without you?

Not exactly, said Sammy seriously. My agent sold me to Colossal

on the strength of that story.

And that’s strength, I said. How about Eugene What’s-his-name?

Does he go too?

Colossal just wanted me, Sammy said simply.
Well, I said, our gain is Colossal’s loss.
No more of these pebbles for me, Sammy said. It’s two hundred

and  fty bucks a week for me, starting a week from Wednesday.

There was a short pause, during which time I reviewed the history

of Sammy Glick, complete from  fteen a week to two hundred and
 fty. It was America, all the glory and the opportunity, the push and
the speed, the grinding of gears and the crap.

See you in the Brown Derby, Sammy was saying.

Then I got nostalgic. I was always a soft guy, and I said:
Sure, kid, and remember, don’t say ain’t.
That was too much for Sammy. He didn’t like it. He didn’t like to

be reminded. There are two kinds of big shots: those who tell as
many people as they can that they started out as newsboys at two
dollars and peanuts a week, and those who take every step as if it
were the only level they knew, those who drive ahead in high speed
and never bother to look back to see where they’ve been. I began to
have a strong hunch that Sammy fell roughly into the latter
category, only more so.

I watched Sammy walk out of the o ce that day, and then I stood

at the window and watched him as he appeared on the street below
and jumped into a taxi. I sound like a sucker, but I felt just a little
sorry for Sammy Glick. I felt the way I did on the commencement
platform, the last day of college, watching the guys; thinking, You
poor uneducated guinea pigs, you’re smug, you’ve got no springs,
and you’re going to take some awful bumps. And it’s not your fault;
they’ve poured you into a mold, like Jell-O. They is the villain, but
don’t get me wrong.

I never said Sammy Glick wasn’t arrogant, deceitful, four- ushing,

crude, cruel—well, I could go on like this all day. But that’s what
Sammy learned. He learned it on the sidewalks in the Bronx and he
learned it well. He knows where he’s going, and he’s running fast.
And when you know that, when you know what makes Sammy run,
you know something.

yet how it happened; you can bet dollars to supervisors I didn’t get
it by stealing any stories from Eugene Spitzer. One of the Warner
brothers must have got the idea to round up all the drama
columnists in New York, and when they pulled in the net, there I
was,  oundering with the rest.

The day after the news broke that I had “surrendered to

Hollywood”—it certainly wasn’t a battle—a girl’s voice came
trembling over the telephone to me.

You probably don’t remember me, she said. This is Miss

Goldbaum—Rosalie Goldbaum.

Her voice sounded funny to me. It was shrill but dead, like a high

note on a cheap piccolo.

I told her I was glad to hear from her again, which was a lie.
I’ve got to see you, she said.
Oh, hell! I thought. Meet me at the Tavern at seven, I said.
I got there  fteen minutes late, and she was sitting in a booth. I

noticed that her shoulder blades stuck out. Her eyes were red. When
I took her hand and said, Gladtoseeyou, it was rubbery and soft, like
a half-blown balloon. She said, Oh, it was so good of you to come.

There was something too intimate and uncomfortable between us.
You’re looking swell, I said.
I read you were going to Hollywood, she told me. You’ll see

Sammy Glick.

guardedly.

Will you—Mr. Manners, would you see him for me?
Sure, I said. When I run into him I’ll say hello for you.
I knew it was more than that. I wanted to  nd out.
It’s not that, she said. You could  nd out why he never writes, she

said. Never, not once, not a single letter, and she kept mumbling it
as if trying to make herself believe it was true.

Sure, I said, I can ask him; but after all, it’s new to him out there,

and, getting adjusted and all, it’s hard to write.

Can you imagine me, defending the slob? It didn’t sound
convincing.

You don’t understand, she said. He promised to send for me the

second week he was out there. I got rid of everything I couldn’t take
along. I was all set. He told me not to worry; he’d send for me in a
couple of weeks. He told me the only reason we couldn’t go together
was he didn’t have the train fare. Said he’d send me his second
week’s salary. Now I don’t know what to do.

Skunk, I said.
Tell him I don’t understand, she said. Ask him why. Ask him why.
She was crying. The waiter was standing over us impatiently. It

was embarrassing.

Do you want yours with onions? I asked.
She wiped her eyes with her napkin. Her mascara was running.
Before I left, I slipped her twenty- ve bucks. Just to salve my

conscience for knowing a slime like Sammy Glick. She put it into
her purse as quickly as possible, as if her hand was trying to put
something over on the rest of her.

Give me your address in Hollywood so I can pay it back, she said.
Write me care of Warner’s, and tell me if you hear from him, I

said.

sucked her in like an undertow. And I stood, thinking what New
York and Sammy Glick had done to Miss Goldbaum, this little
female toothpick of humanity, thin and straight and strong for its
size, but easy to break for a grown-up man, or a grown-up city.

All the way out to Hollywood, Miss Goldbaum kept running

through my mind, and when I got out there, the  rst thing I did was
go over to Colossal and look up Sammy.

His secretary had a bigger o ce than our city room. She said Mr.

Glick was in a story conference.

this thing. Finally Mr. Glick made his appearance. He didn’t wear a
tie. Instead he wore a big yellow scarf, with a big yellow
handkerchief to match. If you put his suit on a table you could have
played checkers on it. He was no longer the thin, pale, eager little
kid that used to say, Thank you, Mr. Manners. He had one of those
California tans, and he was beginning to bulge at the waist. But he
hadn’t stopped running.

Well, Al, he said, so they  nally pulled you into the racket. I

didn’t think you were smart enough.

We sat down in his o ce. His desk looked as long as the runway

in a burlesque theater. He swung his feet on to it. I noticed he was
wearing camel’s-hair socks.

kopecks?

They all send regards, Sammy, I said.
Great old bunch, he said meaninglessly; but once you get the

Indian sign on the producers out here the dough comes rolling in so
fast you use it for wallpaper.

Miss Goldbaum was asking for you too, I said. Sammy stopped
running for a moment. He looked at me and I knew he was
wondering how much I knew. Even through that sunburn he paled.

How is she, Al? he asked.
Swell, I said, just swell. High and dry.
I couldn’t help it, he said.
He was frightened. And it’s a funny thing, the poor guy meant it.

He had to come out here. He had to move along. There was
something in him that wouldn’t be checked, something that had to
run loose. And sometimes it was so strong it ran way out ahead of
him. That’s what Miss Goldbaum got for loving a guy like that. I
guess it can happen to anyone up in the Bronx, and the Bronx is just
like any place else these days, only faster and harder.

Al, he said, I’ll write her. I’ll tell her it just isn’t the place for her:

I’ll send her a thousand bucks. Damn it, you know how those
promises are; it could’ve happened to anybody.

Give her a break, Sammy, I said. And then, for no reason at all, I

said, Give everybody a break.

Sure, he said, sure. What are you working on over at Warner’s?
I don’t know, I said. But I’ve got a hunch it’s the ninth episode of

the Mr. Wu series.

Don’t be a sucker, Sammy said. Turn down the  rst three stories

they give you. They’ll think more of you.

I guess I’ll be seeing you around, I said, getting up.
I sold  ve stories last month, said Sammy, under a di erent name,

because I’m under contract over here.

He put his arm around my neck a ectionately as he walked me to
the door.

Here’s a hot one Lubitsch told me, he said.
I heard that three weeks ago in “21,” I told him when he  nished.
Just one more tip, he said. If you want to get into the real dough

out here, write something on the outside. Write a play. Like me.
When I get it produced it will be twenty- ve hundred a week and
my terms.

I’ll do it tonight when I get home, I said.
Eight weeks later, when I was still waiting for an assignment, I get

a little printed notice in the mail: Mr. Samuel Glick requests the
pleasure of my company at the opening of his play, Live Wire, at the
Hollywood Playhouse.

Sammy’s car picked me up that night and brought me to his

apartment. He was having a cocktail with Public Beauty Number
One. Sixty million people would hock their lives to shake this girl’s
paw, and here was Sammy gurgling champagne with her.

station and there was plenty of excitement and  reworks. All the
time I keep thinking this seems awfully familiar. And then I think
maybe I just dreamed it, like people do sometimes.

and someone sets a basket of roses on the stage, and all of a sudden
it is a big success and I am sitting next to a hit author, and everyone
is stepping over me to shake his hand, and he is modestly denying
that he must have worked very hard on it, saying it just came easy,
three or four nights’ work, and then every one is amazed, and
someone says a new genius has come to Hollywood, and Sammy
says, Oh, I wouldn’t say that exactly.

Going out the lobby, Sammy said he was thirsty, and I said come

up to my place and have a drink; but Sammy said, How about the
Brown Derby? because he wanted to see more people.

would have liked to go to both.

get to a table, so many people  ocked around him and his favorite
star, and all the time I’m trying to think where I saw this play
before.

hair, and went out to the ladies’ room—even movie idols do—
Sammy said, Well, Al, you haven’t told me what you think about the
play.

I think it’s just like something else I’ve seen, I said.

You’re pretty smart, he said.
All of a sudden it came to me: Five-Star Final!
As long as you know, he said. I might as well tell you. I used

exactly the same construction as Five-Star Final, scene for scene, only
I changed the characters, and I made it funny.

Those people don’t know what a genius you are, I said.
The star came back, stopping at three tables en route.
Sammy, she said, when will you write a play for me?
When he can  nd one, I said.
I don’t want to write for you until I feel something great, Sammy

said, something that’s—you.

She moved closer to him.
I gotta go, I said. Thanks for everything. It was an evening I’ll

never forget.

Good-bye, Mr. Masters, she said, feeling very proud and

democratic that she had remembered my name.

I didn’t see Sammy for six months after that. But I used to read

about him in the papers. Live Wire went to New York and he sold it
back to Colossal for a hundred  fty thousand. Then Parsons carried
a story that he and the Beauty were secretly married, but both their
agents denied it, and  nally they said, We’re just good friends, very
good friends. Then DeMille got him to write his recent epic.

The next time I saw him was at the preview of my  rst picture at

Pasadena. I ran into him in the lobby on my way out.

Hello, Sammy, I said.
You’ve got some smart stu  here, Al, he said, but the story line

isn’t straight enough.

No, I said; it isn’t exactly Five-Star Final.

He didn’t bat an eye. After all, he said, there’s only one Five-Star

Final.

I was about to say something, but Sammy’s limousine was at the

curb and he was gone. I got involved in a story conference on the
sidewalk, but I couldn’t keep my mind on it. The more I thought
about Sammy the more I realized he had more drama than all my
characters put together. My little o ce boy was going up. He was a
human rocket. Would he reach the moon, or would he break like a
Fourth-of-July  rework, splattering his sparks into the sea?

By the time Al had  nished his story, the Derby was completely

empty. He and the other guy looked at each other in silence. Al
stared at the caricature of President Roosevelt above the door. As he
stared, an aggressive little man, a little dark ferret of a man, pushed
the door open energetically and stood expectantly awaiting the
headwaiter. He was followed by four others, all of whom seemed to
be talking to him at once.

There he is now, Al said.
Speak of the devil, said his friend.
Of course everything I told you is con dential, said Al, strictly on

the q.t.

Hollywood is a jungle and the smaller animals have to run for

their lives.

Mr. Glick and his party came down the aisle. He saw Al, and

stopped.

Hello, Al. How’s tricks?
Can’t complain. You’re looking good, Al said.
That’s the funny angle on this whole thing, said Al, studying his

glass, after Sammy had passed. My agent tells me I may go to work

for him next week. And I’d still rather have my name on a Sammy
Glick production than any picture in town.

OceanofPDF.com

“LOVE COMES TO SAMMY GLICK”

Leaning against a lamppost outside the theater, Sammy Glick could
hear them. The preview had been over for three minutes. They were
still clapping. He had done it again.

His pal Tony Kreuger came over. Tony was an agent, his clothes

were made on Bond Street, and he sent his sainted mother two
hundred bucks a week. He spent the rest on broads and nightclubs.
He had a talent for showing Sammy a good time. Sammy wasn’t
exactly backward, but he never had time to learn how to talk to
women, he took them as they came. He had enough to do, just
getting ahead.

“Well, kid,” Tony said, blowing him a kiss, “it’s a sweetheart!”
Sammy nodded, ahead of him. “I clocked a hundred and sixteen

laughs.”

“Some of World-Wide’s other pictures could have used a few of

them,” Tony said. “Outside of your three the program stank up the
studio.”

Sammy watched the people as they squeezed out into the lobby.

The stars of the picture cut their way through to him, leaving
desperate autograph hunters rocking in their wake.

“You were O.K.,” Sammy told the stars.
They smiled. They were modest and gracious. They told him it

was a pleasure to work with him.

“O.K.,” Sammy said, “so next time don’t try to tell me you don’t

like the part.”

He grinned after them. “When they go soft on you—that’s the

time to sock it home!” he said to Tony.

Out of the crowd came a middle-aged man who wore his clothes

like someone who had been successful a long time. He was one of

those tall, aristocratic men just beginning to lose the glow of
handsomeness.

“Well, my boy,” he said, “I’m afraid you’ve done it again.”
Sammy shook his hand seriously. “Thanks, Mr. Boyce,” he said,

“let’s hope so.”

called the studio production chief Mr. Boyce. He called him
Grandma behind his back.

They stood on the curb talking cutting and last-minute story

points as the crowd drifted away.

Boyce said mildly. “What do you think, Sammy?”

“Let’s look at it again in the morning,” Sammy said.
Boyce walked on toward his big black Packard limousine. “The

corpse is going back to his hearse,” Sammy cracked to Tony.

Boyce sank into the back seat and closed his eyes as the car

started. Sammy stood on the curb looking after him.

“Where do we go from here?” he asked Tony.
“Swing Club,” Tony said.
“Who’ve you got?” Sammy wanted to know.
“Same old Peggy,” Tony said.
“Don’t you ever get tired of it?” Sammy asked. “That’s all she’s

good for.”

“That’s just the point,” Tony agreed. “She’s nothing but a hayride

and she knows it. At least she never bugs me about auditions and
screen tests like the other broads.”

“And what did you get for me?” Sammy said.
“Something new,” Tony said. “Sally Ann Joyce.”
“Is she O.K.?” Sammy asked.
“I picked her up in the beauty parlor at the Roosevelt,” Tony said.

“And when she gives you a facial …”

It was like every other evening, a montage of hot ri s,

champagne, wisecracks, Swing Club, come-ons, feelies, promises.
The music had been loud and distorted, it had taken old melodies
and twisted them like hairpins, it was a symphony strictly from

hunger, the four of them beating their feet to anguish and festered
ambition, rocking to the beat of a sel sh muse.

long, baby,” he said, patting her, “you were swell.”

“Thanks,” Sally Ann said, “it takes two. We’ll do a repeat.”
“You’re the boss,” Sammy said.
“Sure,” she said, “and I know you—you’re the cute little blonde

who wants a screen test.”

Sammy grinned. She was a good kid. The town was full of good

kids.

met in the projection room. Sammy asked him how he was.

Boyce said he was  ne. He didn’t look  ne. He was beginning to

look tired when he got up in the morning. He looked at Sammy’s
stocky, concentrated  gure. It was taking on weight, but it was
taking on power, too. Somehow, he was glad when the lights went
out.

They looked at the  rst reel of the picture.
“You’re right about the opening, any more footage would kill it,”

Boyce said.

“I’m glad you see it my way, Mr. Boyce,” Sammy said.
Walking back to their o ces, Boyce said to Sammy, “Will you

drop down to my o ce for a few minutes?”

the real place for a big shot. Full of English antiques and real books.

Boyce  lled his pipe, trying to begin.
“I won’t beat around the bush,” he said. “I like to think I can talk

to you like a friend.”

“You bet you can,” Sammy said.
“I’m in a spot,” Boyce went on, “and I think you can help me.”
“Shoot,” Sammy said con dently.
“I don’t suppose you know that the bankers are coming out next

week,” Boyce said. “They’ve got control of World-Wide now and
they want to look over our production set-up.”

Sammy had found that out from Boyce’s secretary weeks before.

“No,” he said, “I didn’t know that.”

the whole thing. Boyce’s pictures had been falling o . There was
something in the wind about the bankers coming out to choose a
new production chief. They wanted to know why the only three real
moneymakers on the program had been Sammy Glick’s.

Boyce paused. He couldn’t tell anybody he knew Sammy’s record

was a thousand percent because he had managed to slip his name
o  every picture that was going sour.

trick. And if I’m back in harness again, you’ll handle the  ve biggest
properties on next year’s program.”

“Let them come to me. I’ll give them an earful. And it will come
from right here.” He tapped his heart dramatically.

World-Wide, he was a smart kid and Geo rey Boyce was a digni ed
genius. He had made up his mind to be Boyce’s assistant if it killed
him. Now in ten unexpected minutes he had wriggled up out of his
respect for Boyce, leaving it behind to blow away like a snake’s skin.

Sammy remembered that there was a di erence. There was a reason
why Boyce had never invited him to his home socially, there was a
reason why Boyce’s friends were brokers and horsewomen and civic
leaders while Sammy trucked to swing music with Tony and the
Peggys and the always Sally Anns. This was a new world into which
Sammy couldn’t run. He would have to crawl.

“You’re giving a party for those bankers, aren’t you?”
“I suppose I have to,” Boyce said.
“Then get a load of this,” Sammy said. “Why let the bankers

search me out? Why not have me right there, smacking them in the
face, showing them you and I are like this?”

“Of course,” Boyce said. “Thanks, Sammy.”
“Forget it,” Sammy said. “I should thank you.”
When Sammy returned to his o ce, his secretary showed him a

clipping from the morning edition of the evening paper. Is Sammy
Glick’s heart Suzy-Q-ing for  lmcutie Sally Ann Joyce?

tell her to lay o  the press releases. And next time they juggle my
name with any of those  oozies, get them to deny it. And if Tony
Kreuger calls me, tell him I’m out.”

“Turning over a new leaf, Mr. Glick?”
“Yeah,” he said, unabashed, “and don’t forget to burn the old

ones. Glick marches on.”

didn’t feel as sure of himself as usual. He felt subdued. Sammy
recognized Harrington from his pictures. A. J. Harrington. The
brains of the company. And Sammy was going to meet him right
here in this room. Harrington was perfectly cast for his part. Tall,
athletic, early  fties, a sort of Charles Evans Hughes still able to
wield a polo mallet.

While Harrington was shaking hands, a woman came into the

room. She was something to stare at, tall, handsome, elegant. To
Sammy she seemed like something that had just stepped out of a
Saks Fifth Avenue window.

“Mr. Glick, I want you to meet Miss Harrington,” Boyce said.
She was the most untouchable woman he had ever seen. He stood

there staring at her, and bowed sti y.

“My father has talked about you,” she said.
He saw that she was taller than he was.
“I’m very glad, Miss Harrington,” Sammy said.
“Why?” she laughed. “You don’t know what he said yet.”
“That’s right,” Sammy said. “How stupid of me.” He knew that

wasn’t just what he meant to say.

“As a matter of fact,” she said, “You’re not being stupid at all.

Father raved about your pictures.” Her eyes were laughing at him.
She knew how to make him feel small and uncomfortable.

Sammy said, “I hope you did, too.”
“I haven’t seen them,” she said. “I’ve been in Europe all summer.”
“I’m afraid you’ll never miss them,” Sammy laughed weakly.
“You shouldn’t be so modest,” she said.
“After 
all, 
they’re 
just 
moving 
pictures,” 
Sammy 
said

uncomfortably. “I mean they won’t live, or anything.”

“I have a feeling modesty doesn’t become you,” she said.
He o ered her his arm as they went in to dinner. He wondered if

she was smiling because she knew he had never done that before.

Harrington. To the Boyces it was too obvious that this was only the
lull, the seven-course, elaborately served lull before the storm.
Paine, the other banker, and Harrington knew it, too. Sammy sat
next to Miss Harrington, trying to think of the right thing to say,
conscious of her smooth white arms close to him, watching her all
the time out of the corner of his eye, casting a quick glance now and
then at the revealing semicircles that plunged seductively into her
low-cut dinner gown, trying to see behind the pride and the elegant
aloofness of that face.

Mr. Harrington frowned, watching them. Laurette had found

another victim. He hoped Mr. Glick wasn’t the sensitive kind.

Laurette went on talking, went on mocking, asking Sammy how

pictures were made, what he thought of the medium as an art form,
whether he thought Gainsborough would have made a good
cameraman.

him a line on how to proceed; he was beginning to get ideas. He
thought back to the women he had known, Rosalie Goldbaum,
scrawny and sincere, lost track of years ago; then all the Sally Ann
Joyces. This was something new, worth being insulted for. This was
Class, and Class was something strange and wonderful to Sammy.

After dinner the men assembled in the den.
“I hope my daughter didn’t upset you,” Harrington remarked.
“Upset me!” Sammy said. “Nothing upsets me. She’s been

charming.”

box-o ce drop was due partly to general recession and partly to
double features, he had a solution for both problems. He had a way
of talking fast that sounded so sure.

“It’s young men like you who are going to lick this thing,”

Harrington said.

there were more men who wanted to get rich fast. It made them
hop.”

tougher.”

When the guests had gone, Boyce asked Sammy to stay on.
“Good work, Sammy,” he said. “You made a  ne impression.”
“It’s a cinch,” Sammy said. “It’s like choking babies.”
“I suppose they made an appointment with you,” Boyce asked.
“No,” Sammy said, “but Miss Harrington is having lunch with me

at the studio tomorrow.”

“Good idea to have her on our side,” Boyce said. “Harrington

thinks a lot of her.”

“Same here,” Sammy said. “She’s like the beautiful heiress in

pictures whom the boy mistakes for a working girl. I didn’t know
there really were any dames like that!”

Then she came in, apologizing carelessly, and they shook hands. Her
suit was mannish, but to Sammy there was nothing masculine about
her. The cut of her jacket implied a subtle sex appeal. He looked her
over from head to foot as she came toward him, completely satis ed
that his  rst impression of her was justi ed. Maybe it was better to
come out of the Bronx because Class meant something to you when
you  nally hit the real thing.

Laurette wasn’t very hungry. A salad would be su cient. It

seemed barbaric to eat anything more on these hot Hollywood
afternoons. Sammy said he supposed she was right. He had just
ordered frankfurters and sauerkraut.

Sammy could feel her watching him intently while he ate. He felt

himself trying nervously to eat as neatly as possible.

“How do you like Hollywood?” Sammy asked between mouthfuls.
“I can’t tell yet,” she said. “We have better restaurants in New

York and more fun in Newport. I mean, I can’t tell until I get to
know you people better.”

“You don’t talk at all like I expected,” Sammy said.

“Custom-made. Not for the general public.”

“They should be,” Sammy said.
“Why?” she asked. “You’re not in the market for one, are you?”
They walked back to the o ce without saying much.
At the main entrance Sammy held her hand a moment too long.

He wanted to see what she would do. Her only reaction was a smile.
He felt like the little boy in Sunday School who has just brought the
young teacher  owers.

“Thanks,” she said. “You were really charming.”
“When will I see you again?” he asked.
“Now I know who puts that chestnut in all the movies,” she said.
Sammy tightened up. He had thrown himself across every puddle

instead of the cape, and it wasn’t paying o . He started up the stairs
toward his o ce. “O.K.,” he said. “You win, lady.”

The next evening, Sammy called her. She was alone in

Hollywood, he said. She might want someone to show her the bright
spots.

“How thoughtful of you,” Laurette said. “Come right over.”
When he arrived at her apartment, Sammy’s enthusiasm froze.

She was having cocktails with a young man. The young man stood
up. Sammy found himself staring into a broad expanse of sti  shirt.
Laurette was in evening clothes, too.

“George was on his way to the air meet at Albuquerque. I thought

it might be fun if we all went out together.”

George didn’t seem to mind Sammy at all.
“I haven’t seen Laurie since Biarritz last summer,” he explained.
They talked about Biarritz. Had Sammy ever been there?
Sammy said, “Listen, Miss Harrington, don’t let me butt in. Why

don’t you two kids run along without me?”

“We wouldn’t think of it. Mr. Glick is so clever,” Laurette said.

“He knows everything about making pictures. He’s going to tell us
all about it at dinner. Aren’t you, Mr. Glick?”

Sammy tried to turn the compliment aside, if it was a

compliment. But he couldn’t do it deftly enough. Laurette kept
laughing at him silently and politely, her superiority piercing

Sammy’s pride like banderillas, stinging, hurting, forcing  ercer
 ghting.

felt better when he beat George to it by ordering the most expensive
wine on the list. But when it was brought, Laurette said, “If you
haven’t got the 1931, don’t bother. That’s the only good year.”

The orchestra was playing a tango. George asked Sammy if he

would be good enough to excuse them. “Go ahead,” Sammy said,
“don’t let me stop you.” Sammy didn’t know how to tango. He
wasn’t surprised to  nd that Laurette could dance it like a pro. He
sat there like a stupe, burning, deciding that Laurette had only
asked him up here to show him up. Perhaps the thing to do was to
take a powder and deprive her of this satisfaction. But he couldn’t,
his eyes took every step with her. When she danced she closed her
eyes, that lithe, graceful body swaying, poised a tempting moment,
swaying on again to the sensual rhythm.

Then they returned to the table, and Sammy stood up, feeling

challenged and sore, and popped down too quickly again.

“A beautiful dance,” Laurette said. “You feel wild and free.”
She knew Sammy had never felt wild and free.
The music was back to jazz. Sammy was going to show her. He

nodded toward the dance  oor, and they rose together. He held her
tight against him, frankly and crudely, enjoying the double
satisfaction, the feel of her so close to him, and the chance that this
would hit the columns.

Sammy was a sti , crude dancer but he was a strong leader. She

knew from the moment he pressed his hand stubbornly on her back,
forcing her to follow all his mistakes. She saw how insistent he was,
how unapologizing, uncompromising when she tried to press him
out of the simple box step he refused to vary. It was a struggle, both
of them felt it, and Sammy was enjoying it at last.

“You dance divinely,” she said.
“Listen,” he said. “You don’t have to hand me that. I know how I

dance.” He was beginning to  nd himself.

“Have it your way,” she said. “You’ll never be Fred Astaire.”
“Wanna quit?” Sammy said. “No,” she said, “I’m enjoying it.”

to be polite any more.

At twelve o’clock George said he had to go.
“Nice fellow,” Sammy said. “Old friend?”
“The world is full of nice fellows.”
They talked until three o’clock.
Sammy told her what he expected to do in the world.
She told him it must be marvelous to want to do anything.
“You don’t have to try,” Sammy said. “You’ve got everything. I

want everything, too.”

Sammy was pleased, knowing he was getting to her. She must

have realized it, too, for suddenly she said, “I don’t know why I’m
telling you all this. I really don’t like you very much.”

your old man!” Sammy said. “How do you like that?”

he thought. She’s Class and I’m going to get her. Me. Sammy Glick.

Mr. Harrington invited Sammy to lunch with him at Victor Hugo’s

next day. “My daughter’s told me a lot about you,” he said
cheerfully. “You’ve made quite an impression.”

“What a marvelous girl,” Sammy said. “You must be very proud.”
They talked about business. Harrington didn’t waste words. “Only

three pictures really made any money this year,” he said. “Your
three. How do you account for it?”

“I don’t know,” Sammy fenced. “Boyce did the best he could.”
“The reason we’re out here,” Harrington continued, “is to  nd out

if his best is good enough.”

“It isn’t entirely his fault if production costs are too high.”
“Then you think costs are too high?” Harrington pounced.
Sammy hesitated just long enough. “You put me in a di cult

position, Mr. Harrington. I don’t like to talk against my boss.”

Think it over and we’ll get together later in the week.”

That evening Boyce called Sammy in. “You lunched with

Harrington today. You’re not double-crossing me, are you, Sammy?”

“Hell, no,” Sammy said. “Christ, I fought for you.”

know how it is in the studio. You’re the last friend I have.”

“All I need is more time, Geo rey,” Sammy said.
Every time Laurette came home from an evening with Sammy she

was too bored ever to want to see him any more. Every time he
called again, she accepted. He called every night. He never let up.
He was always the same.

For Sammy Glick these were unforgettable days. In his most

ambitious  ights of ambition, he had never looped so many loops so
high.

for dinner. Just the two of them. She wore a strapless, crimson
evening dress that clung to her bare powdered shoulders. There was
more splendor to her than Sammy had ever known in the world.

Sammy’s butler served martinis. They drank together, feeling

important, mellow and alone. Tension between them was
evaporating.

“This reminds me of a night I spent in Venice,” Laurette said.
“Why?” Sammy said. “It sure doesn’t remind me of the Bronx.

Forget about Venice. Everything I ever heard about Venice sounded
like a lot of crap.”

“Mr. Glick, how romantic,” she said.
“How about thinking about us?” Sammy said.
She only smiled at him, and he trembled, determined to get her.

She was so beautiful. It was romance. She was gorgeous, she was
re ned and irresistible, and—he kept cheering himself on—Sammy
Glick was going to get her.

It was even better after dinner.
“Look at that garden,” Sammy said. “I’ve got a swell garden.”
They walked down the steps. His arm went around her waist. She

drew away and he moved with her. She smiled at him and the arm
remained, holding her tightly at the hip.

“How do you like those big red  owers?” Sammy asked.
“Hibiscus,” she said. “Lovely—‘Rose red, princess hibiscus, rolling

her pointed Chinese petals!’ ”

“Christ!” Sammy said. “What’s that?”

“A poem I like about hibiscus,” she said.
“Princess hibiscus,” Sammy said. “That’s swell. Just like you.” He

suddenly kissed her lips. He felt like a million bucks. Her million
bucks.

They had reached the teahouse at the end of the lawn. “Let’s go in

here,” Sammy said. “It’s getting cold.”

“No,” she said. “There’s still a warm breeze. No, Sammy.”
But he was kissing her again and she was only saying no and

don’t. That meant she couldn’t stop him. They went into the
teahouse. It was an old rule of Sammy’s: When they go soft on you
—that’s the time to sock it home!

she had clung to him, he was stronger and he had won, as he had
always won.

afterwards. He felt dizzy with his achievement.

“I must go home,” she said. “Call me a taxi.”
“I love you,” Sammy said. “I know it sounds screwy to say it.

You’re the  rst thing I ever loved.”

Then she was gone.
He stood there in awe of himself. Sammy Glick in love. He felt

important, released. His whole life had been a dare. This had been
the most outrageous of all. Who could stop him now? Sammy Glick
and Laurette Harrington—Laurette Harrington and Sammy Glick,
Sammy Glick …

Next day Sammy had lunch with Harrington again.
“I have something important to tell you—to ask you. I’ll give it to

you straight. Only way I know how to deal. I want to marry
Laurette.”

“You love her?” Harrington asked. “You’re sure?”
“A thousand percent,” Sammy said. “I’m the kind of a guy who

doesn’t fall in love easy—but I was sold on Laurette right o  the bat.
I was afraid I wasn’t good enough for her. But then I got to thinking
nobody gets anywhere by blushing and tossing in the towel. So here
I am, banging on the old door.”

knew that times were changing. He was still on the board of
directors, but he had a feeling things were not really safe. Not even
Laurette knew how worried he had been. And any fool could see
this Sammy kid was on his way. Sammy might be a sound
investment.

“Of course, it’s not up to me,” Harrington said. “Laurette’s always

done everything she wants.”

“I’m asking her tonight,” Sammy said positively.
“Fine,” Harrington said. “I see no objection. Have you thought

any more about the studio set-up? Paine and I have more or less
decided Boyce isn’t right for it any more.”

“You couldn’t  nd anyone better than Boyce,” Sammy said.

“Among the older producers.”

wondered what Laurette would say to Sammy. Things had moved
quickly. A son-in-law in power in Hollywood might not hurt him on
the board.

That night Sammy proposed to Laurette.
“But I haven’t even told you I loved you,” Laurette said.
“But you couldn’t have done what you did if you hadn’t loved

me,” Sammy argued. “I would never have tried if I wasn’t sure you
did.”

“You’re always sure, aren’t you?” she asked. Her father had

already told her he thought the marriage was a good thing. But she
knew it was more than that. She would never have known how to
turn him down. He was so set on it she had the feeling a tidal wave
would sweep up across Hollywood if she said no.

“This is the greatest day of my life,” Sammy said. “Baby, you and

me are going to have everything we want in the world.”

The next afternoon Boyce called Sammy in. He had aged. Sammy

was startled to see how old he looked.

“Well, Sammy,” he said, “I want to thank you.”
“Thank me!” Sammy said. “What for?”
“I just got through talking with Harrington,” Boyce said. “He told

me you did everything you could for me—but the board back east

had already decided. They want you.”

“I’m sorry, Geo rey. If there’s anything I can do …”
“Thanks,” Boyce said. “Nobody can really help anybody else these

days. You’ve got your own worries.”

worries. The world was his kite. All he had to do was let out more
string. Up, up, up!

the new chief executive of World-Wide. The  rst thing Sammy did
was remodel Boyce’s o ce. He wanted something much bigger, and
much more modern.

One week later Harrington had the honor to announce the

engagement of his daughter Laurette to Mr. Samuel Glick.

The day of the announcement Sammy wrote the  rst letter he

hadn’t dictated in two years. It was to his mother in the Bronx.

Dear Mama—

I can hardly believe it is your little Sammy writing you, so many

wonderful things have happened to me. Now I’m the whole boss of
the studio. But that isn’t what I wanted to write you about. Mama,
don’t be worried, I am going to marry the  nest girl in the world.
Oh sure, she may be rich and ritzy but I just want you to know that
I never forget what you told me about getting married when I left
home—that a good, simple wife meant more than anything I might
ever do. But Mama, no matter how perfect this all is for me, it
wouldn’t be right if you weren’t here to meet the bride and be at the
wedding. So I am enclosing a thousand bucks. Buy some nice clothes
and start out here on the Super Chief. I want you to be as happy as I
am. Your loving son,

Sammy    

The next morning Sammy’s secretary called in and said Tony

Kreuger was on the phone.

“Hello, Tony,” he said. “What’s new, kid?”

“Same old merry-go-round,” Tony said. “You seem to have a

corner on the news these days.”

“I know it,” Sammy said. “I guess I’m a lucky guy.”
“All kidding aside,” Tony said with a sudden note of sincerity, “I

think it’s swell, pal, I’m tickled to death for you, and the beauty of
the thing is you deserved it.”

“That’s damned nice of you, Tony—anything else on your mind?”
“I was wondering if I could throw a stag for you Saturday night,”

Tony said. “Get some of the old gang in.”

On the morning of the stag party, Laurette called Sammy for

lunch. “I’ve just bought a new sport dress, darling,” she said, “so I
thought we might go Vendoming.”

Sammy was sorry—he was working so hard now he only had a

sandwich and a milkshake sent in. But he’d drop in for cocktails.

other men.”

“They know me well enough to throw you right back,” Sammy

said.

the Australian who ran a local fencing school and doubled for
swashbucklers like Errol Flynn, she wondered if Sammy was right.
She wondered at the way his insolence had  rst amused her, then
overwhelmed her—and now? She studied Gordie carefully. He
would smile when she smiled, and if she leaned forward he would
meet her at the middle of the table. She liked to do it. It brought
back that necessary sense of superiority. She would not let Sammy
crush it. Maybe, if she laughed with Gordie, she could rediscover
her kind of pride again.

Late that day Sammy dropped in for cocktails at Laurette’s. She

met him in a green satin lounging robe. They kissed. “Couldn’t you
possibly stay tonight?” she asked.

“No chance, honey,” Sammy said. “Can’t let the boys down.”
“I wish you didn’t have to go,” she said.
“There’ll be thousands of nights from now on, huh, honey?” He

patted her a ectionately. He still couldn’t picture himself doing
that, but there it was.

was the  nal victory dinner, with two hundred of Hollywood’s more
prominent males doing him homage. And Sammy was king of them
all. As he came in, they all stood up, raised champagne glasses and
droned, “Poor Sammy, poor Sammy,” but Sammy could laugh
because he had met the enemy and they were his.

the beginning of a dizzy, exultant, triumphant evening. Over and
over again, Sammy told Tony and every other willing listener how
he rose from newsboy on the east side. Sammy was feeling great. He
got up and made a speech. Then the lights went blue and purple and
a gorgeous stripper took o  the last bead. Sammy drank more
champagne in the dark, smiling to himself. This was what he wasn’t
going to marry and he felt cocky inside and out.

Peggy and Sally Ann?—I told ’em to meet me there—said I might
bring you along.” It was Tony.

“You can take Peggy and Sally Ann both and …” Sammy began

and stopped. “Sorry,” he  nished. “Not tonight.”

“One little nightcap,” Tony begged.
“Not tonight,” Sammy insisted. “Thanks, Tony.”
“Not going moral on me?” Tony asked.
“I’m afraid it’s too late,” Sammy said, more stubbornly. “Maybe

some other time, huh?”

other.”

Sammy was gladder he hadn’t given in when he hit the fresh air.

He had to see Laurette, cool, refreshing and clean like the wind that
whistled past his car as he raced to her. It was two-thirty in the
morning, he swayed up the steps to her door, drunker now on
backslaps and self-approbation than anyone would ever be on
champagne.

He let himself in with his key. She had given him a key.

Something seemed wrong with the house. Maybe he shouldn’t have
come. But hadn’t she asked him to spend the night? One little
reassuring shtup and he’d be on his way.

and the radio blaring. He stopped still, like any animal, listening. He
heard laugher, a duet, low and intimate.

sober. Yelling, “Laurette—Laurette!”

tighter around her, that green satin.

hoarse to Sammy. “Well?”

He waited for her to alibi, apologize, plead, curse, weep. But that

was all she said. He waited for her to go on, beg forgiveness; he
wanted her to wilt beneath his righteous stare, but she only stood
there, not bothering to hold the robe so closely around her any
more, stood there proud and composed, stately and cruelly self-
possessed. These were the elements he loved and admired and
aspired to, and he hated them, he wanted suddenly to hide from
them. He would make no scene, he would never ask her who was
there. And she had been ready to tell him, she was all set to say,
“Gordie Melville, dear,” and look at him, and watch him wilt like
yesterday’s gardenia, knowing he could not crush her any more,
letting him know the Gordon Melvilles would be her barricade.

Sammy only stared, their future running through his mind like

ticker tape:

Mr. and Mrs. Glick held a house-warming at their charming Bel Air

home Mr. and Mrs. Glick are celebrating their  fth anniversary with a
three-month European tour Please tell Mrs. Glick not to expect me home
tonight Mrs. Glick is calling from Honolulu, sir Mrs. Glick and I are only
too glad to accept your weekend invitation Among those at the opening
were Mr. Glick and his charming wife dazzling in white sequins and
ermine Mr. and Mrs. Glick  …

They were going to have everything they wanted.
“I’ll call you in the morning,” Sammy said almost in a whisper.

“We have to meet my mother at the train at six.”

She smiled at him boldly. “I was planning on it,” she said.
Then she came toward him, calmly took his face in her two hands,

and kissed him as if they had been married twenty years.

again. The sobbing came only when the door was shut behind him.
Tight, strained, hysterical little sobs he tried futilely to choke. And
then he couldn’t hold it any longer. He sat down on the last step and
cried into his nervous little hands.

It was all over in a minute. He wiped his face with his silk

initialed handkerchief, got behind the wheel of his roadster, and the
next stop was Tony’s apartment.

Ten minutes later he was with Tony and Peggy and Sally Ann.

The all-night station was booming. “Here we are—back in the Swing
Club,” the announcer said.

Sally Ann jumped up and did a funny little dance to it.

“Remember, honey? It’s just like last time!”

Sammy didn’t smile. Then Tony came over and stuck a drink in

his hand.

happening this fast. What a man!”

“You called it all right,” Sammy admitted.
“Just since that night in the Swing Club!” Tony marveled. “In

charge of all production, and married to big money. Eastern money.
Baby, I’ve got to hand it to you.”

“You said it, Tony, I got Hollywood right where I want it—on its

back!” Sammy whacked Sally Ann on her pretty little ass and she
laughed appreciatively. He told Peggy to turn the radio up loud, the
all-night jazz station. “Stompin’ at the Savoy …” He tossed o  his
drink and brought his live little hands together in a sudden clap of
de ance. “Fuck ’em all! A one-way ticket on the fast express! I’m
sitting pretty!”

OceanofPDF.com

AFTERWORD

In 1939—no, it can’t be almost  fty years ago!—this writer took his
leave of Hollywood to go east, speci cally back to his second alma
mater, Dartmouth College, to write a book about his  rst alma
mater, Hollywood. He had been taken there when he was four. His
father, B.P., a twenty-six-year-old pioneer photoplay-writer, had
worked himself up the movie ladder to producer and partner of L.B.
Mayer in the now-forgotten, downtown Los Angeles Mayer-
Schulberg Studio. By the time I was running the Blue-and-White
daily, and a mediocre half-mile for L.A. High, Mayer and my old
man had become bitter rivals, L. B. running MGM and B.P. running
Paramount.

After Dartmouth and three years as apprentice screen writer for

three legendary moguls, David Selznick, Walter Wanger and Sam
Goldwyn, I was ready to leave Hollywood because I had learned
from years of watching and a few years of personal frustration that
in the dream factories the writer was low man on the totem pole.

Whether you made $100 a week or $2,500, you and your story

ideas, your scenes, your completed screenplays, were shu ed like
cards by the studio heads and their usually sycophantic assistants
then known as “supervisors.”

Everyone who goes into the writing life has hopes and dreams.

But Sammy was to endure beyond my rosiest fantasies. In 1952, it
was included in the Modern Library, and I wondered if the name
listed between Schopenhauer and Shakespeare belonged to me. In
1960, NBC presented a two-part television version starring Larry
Blyden as Sammy and John Forsythe as his Boswell, Al Manheim.
Then a musical version starring Steve Lawrence ran for two years on
Broadway. Year after year, paperback editions continued to appear,
most recently in the late seventies with an Author’s Afterword

speculating as to whether a Sammy Glick, greedy for political
power, had taken over the White House a few years earlier.

put it on his ex cathedra list, Sammy had remained a Hollywood
untouchable. But now, after all the years of ostracism my father had
predicted for the book at the hands of the original moguls, What
Makes Sammy Run? has  nally broken through the studio gates. A
new generation of studio heads, fresh out of  lm schools or rock
music, have practically forgotten Louie Mayer and his Doge-like
taboos.

screen, and to reappraise the contemporary signi cance of Sammy
Glick, I  nd myself challenged by the question: What has happened
in America—or is it to America?—that has so drastically changed
our perception of Sammy Glick from dread repugnance to upwardly
mobile acceptance, if not actual admiration and emulation?

ago, Sammy’s chances for enduring fame, on a scale of one to ten,
seemed to hover around zero. Bennett Cerf, my publisher, warned
the neophyte novelist to expect the worst. Even if it enjoyed good
reviews, Cerf went on, the chances for commercial success were
virtually nil. It was the cold verdict of the publishing world that
there simply was no market, and precious few readers, for a
Hollywood novel. The horror stories abounded. Only the year
before, The Day of the Locust had not earned back its $500 advance
to Nathanael West—that premature absurdist and avid hunter—who
had to keep on grinding out western-movie scripts at Republic to
keep food on the table and shells in his shotgun. The popular hobo
writer Jim Tully, the up-and-coming John O’Hara … all had come a
cropper on the Hollywood novel. Even when Sammy won
enthusiastic advance notice from a trio of literary heavy hitters,
O’Hara, Dorothy Parker and Scott Fitzgerald, Cerf stood by his  rst
printing of twenty- ve hundred copies, and promised if the book
sale exceeded what he considered a rosy estimate, he would wine
and dine me at “21.”

Hollywood, and the people who go to movies don’t read books,”
Cerf ponti cated. It sounded reasonable. I was prepared to paste the
O’Hara and Fitzgerald letters in a scrapbook for my young family
while going back to screenwriting to support them.

once but month after month, as the book took o  in a way none of
us had foreseen. The New York Times gave it the equivalent of four
stars: “Best  rst-novel of the year.” In Hollywood, it was the succès
de scandale my veteran producer/father had feared. “You’ll never
work in this town again,” he had written me after reading it. “How
will you live?” From the moment the book dared show its face in
Hollywood bookstore windows, I was marked “traitor.” Sam
Goldwyn, literally turning purple with anger,  red me. Hedda
Hopper, the columnist who could make or break careers, accosted
me in a popular Hollywood restaurant with “Humph! I read that
book! How dare you!”

wood’s boss of bosses, Mayer, my no-longer-benevolent “uncle
Louie,” of MGM. At a meeting of the Motion Picture Producers’
Association, L.B. turned on my father: “B.P., how could you let your
own  esh and blood write such a book?” And before my
beleaguered father could answer, L.B. intoned, “You know what we
should do with him? We should deport him!” The only member of
the powerful MPPA who dared the wrath of L.B. was my liberal and
maverick old man. “For Christ’s sake, Louie, he’s the only novelist
who ever came from Hollywood. Where the hell are you going to
deport him, Catalina Island?”

With Mayer wanting to deport me, I had the unusual distinction of
being attacked simultaneously by the Communist party and John
Wayne. Although it was the  rst book in the history of Hollywood
 ction to side with the Writers Guild in its bitter struggle against
Mayer, Thalberg & Co., it failed to meet the Hollywood Communists’

high standards for social realism à la Stalin. But to John Wayne—
Big Duke, the USC football lineman transformed into an all-
American movie star through the magic of John Ford—Sammy was
the personi cation, or novelization, of the Communist Manifesto.

such as Chasen’s, Ciro’s and Romano ’s, became Beverly Hills
versions of High Noon. In Wayne’s superpatriotic eyes, an attack on
Hollywood (or the Sammy Glicks of Hollywood) was an attack on
Free Enterprise, Mother and The Flag. I was verbally abused,
publicly denounced, and if  ogging had been permitted in
Hollywood along with tongue-lashing, I would have been as
bloodied as Kunta Kinte in Roots.

Wayne’s righteous indignation. One of the happiest moments of my
life was sailing into Puerto Vallarta in the mid-sixties on a ninety-
foot schooner with my wife, Geraldine Brooks. The timing was
perfect, a Mexican Paci c sunset, the company of friends we could
laugh with and exquisite margaritas. If I cashed in my chips at this
moment, I felt, I’d be ahead of the Dealer. Then Gerry was saying,
“Budd, try not to get upset, but look who’s coming in with us.” I
looked, and lost a little of my Baja California tan. Side by side with
our Double Eagle was the John Wayne yacht. When the Great
American Hero and I stepped ashore almost shoulder-to-shoulder,
we were welcomed by the mayor. To celebrate this historic moment
—the arrival of a legendary American  lm star and a prominent
American writer, who still lived part-time in Mexico, Puerto Vallarta
was planning an o cial reception/ esta that evening. Big Duke and
I as co-guests of honor! While I could honestly admire his hulking
presence on the screen, he and Louis B. had drummed me out of
Hollywood. Now he was lousing up Puerto Vallarta for me—and PV
was still an appealing, largely unspoiled  shing village in those
days.

and have Wayne shoot me down for Sammy again the way he wastes
Injuns in those westerns of his. Said the ever-practical Gerry, “We’ll
put you at a table across the room from his—with your back to him.

You love Mexico, the music, the tequila viejo, the people—just forget
Wayne’s there. Enjoy yourself.”

neck. John Wayne—with his rough-and-ready entourage behind him
—was ready to drag me to the nearest jacaranda tree and string me
up as a traitor. More than a score of years had passed since Sammy
 rst appeared on the scene—but the great defender of the Alamo
and the American Way (with the exception of the First Amendment)
had never forgotten or forgiven. After a brief scu e—when the
guests of honor were separated, and the mayor was ready to run for
cover rather than high o ce—the hero of Fort Apache  xed me with
that famous look and lines only a natural like Duke could get away
with: “How about you ’n’ me settlin’ this once ’n’ for all? I’ll be back
at midnight. An’ I’ll be waitin’ for ya!”

ELEVEN-THIRTY: In my room at the hotel I started warming up, Walter

Mitty throwing furious combinations that would render hors de
combat the mighty warrior of Iwo Jima and The Longest Day. I had
been around boxers all my life. I liked them better than actors. I had
watched them get ready. This was my moment.

QUICK DISSOLVE: TWO old beach masters lunge at each other—but there’s

an obstruction somewhere between them. It’s the invisible,  ve-foot-
two, 110-pound Gerry making it impossible for either of us to throw
a punch without hitting this uninvited but insistent “referee.”
“Gerry, please get out of the way,” I beg. Wayne was trying just as
hard to remove this unexpected obstacle to his heroics. So, as our
corners pulled us apart, the only winner was Gerry. It went into the
record books, like most Hollywood  sticu s, as ND—no decision. Or
maybe that should read “double TKO”—the T standing for tequila.

If Sammy Glick had been perceived as strictly and narrowly a

product of Hollywood, if the character and the novel as a whole had
been viewed as myopically and self-protectively as had Louie Mayer
and John Wayne, my career might have been over and I would have
been down and out in Beverly Hills. But the perception of Sammy
Glick by the critics and the public was far broader and deeper than
we could have anticipated. I had written about Sammy Glick

because I had been brought up among Sammy Glicks, and I had
used Hollywood as a background because Hollywood was my
hometown and, until I exchanged palm trees for pine trees, the only
community I knew.

But the Sammy Glick I had chosen as my prototype was not linked

only to Hollywood hucksterism. The New York Times Book Review
welcomed him to the select company of American anti-heroes from
Simon Legree to George Babbitt. In review after review, Sammy
Glick was described as “aggression personi ed,” a “conquistador
from the gutter.” In time, Sammy Glick was to creep into the
language, and even into some dictionaries. A “Sammy” might
become rich, powerful and famous, but you wouldn’t want him to
marry your daughter. In fact, you wouldn’t want to turn your back
on him for fear he’d cop your watch, your story, your company,
your wife, your life. The trouble was, Sammy lived by di erent rules
from the rest of us; as the moralizing narrator Al Manheim puts it to
him, “You never had the  rst idea of give-and-take … It had to be
all you all the way. You had to make individualism the most
frightening ism of all.”

The reason the book enjoyed such spontaneous success, we were

learning, was that I had touched a nerve—not a Hollywood nerve,
not a Jewish nerve, but something  awed and dangerous in our
national character—some upside-downing of the Golden Rule that
resulted in its brutal opposite: “Do it to him before he does it to
me!”

That was Sammy’s compulsive creed, that was his pirate  ag,

that’s what made him—in the words of one reader—”part of the
established folklore of America.” “What Made Sammy Run?”
became a subject not just for literary critics but for historians and
psychiatrists.

As mentioned in our introduction, the eminent Dr. Franz

Alexander, head of the Psychoanalytical Institute at the University
of Chicago, in his provocative book The Age of Unreason, thought he
had found his answer in Sammy’s being the ultra-aggressive,
ruthless and belligerently self-centered type rather common among
second-generation 
Americans 
from 
impoverished 
immigrant

families. Their fathers have lost their prestige and their in uence
due to their inability to cope with their new environments.

chapter to Sammy Glick, his answer made sense only up to a point.
Was the Sammy Glick syndrome really limited to children of
impoverished 
immigrants? 
“Detribalization,” 
Alexander 
had

diagnosed the disease. The son has lost respect for his father’s
(tribal) values, but has yet to be a ected by the mores of his
adopted culture. So he is left and lost in a moral no-man’s-land.

But if that were so, how would you account for the mail Sammy
drew from all over the country? From insurance companies in
Hartford, from chain stores in the South, from mail-order houses in
the Middle West, people were writing that I could not have written
Sammy without personal knowledge of their own mail-room boy
who had run over their backs to become o ce manager, and in
some cases company president. Teenage white boys in Atlanta,
third-generation sons of the middle class in Boston, no ethnic group,
geographical area or economic stratum seemed to have a lock on
Sammy. He was not from Rivington Street alone, or from Sunset and
Vine. He was made in America.

Through the forties and  fties, Sammy endured as the

quintessential antihero, the bad example, the free-enterprise system
at its meanest, brass-knuckle, kick-in-the-groin dirtiest. By now the
book had sold into the millions, read by people who loved to hate
Sammy Glick.

It was in the early seventies that I began to feel the  rst

disturbing shift in what was to become a 180-degree turn in our
national attitude toward Sammy. Following a talk I had just given at
a local college on the impact of success on American writers, a
young man came up to thank me for creating Sammy Glick. “He’s a
great character. I love him. I felt a little nervous about going out
into the world and making it. But reading Sammy gives me
con dence. I read it over and over. It’s my bible.”

and colleagues in the back. As I took it hesitantly, I asked myself,
What have I done? Or what has a changing, greedier, more cynical
America done to Sammy Glick? Speaking on other campuses
through the seventies, I found to my dismay that the  rst young
man hitching his star to Sammy Glick’s was not at all an aberration
but the harbinger of a trend. Now all the young people in college
reading a new edition of What Makes Sammy Run? were reacting to
him as if he were a positive guide to their futures onward and
upward. The book I had written as an angry exposé of Sammy Glick
was becoming a character reference: How to succeed in America
when really trying!

What had happened, of course, is that we had left the sixties

behind, with its hippies and  ower children and their communal
dream of sharing and loving, and had moved on to the Nixon
generation, the Bebe Rebozo generation of deal-makers and Do-It-to-
Them-Before-They-Do-It-to-Us. In that context, the Watergate break-
in was no accident, nor was Attorney General Mitchell’s Glickish
boast, “When the going gets tough, the tough get going.”

Nor the blanket apology for immoral acts or immoral behavior,

“Everybody does it.”

No, not everybody does it; conscience and social responsibility are

still alive if not too well in America. But the dramatic
transformation of Sammy Glick from the antihero of the forties to
the role-model hero for the Yuppies of the eighties is a painful
reminder of the moral breakdown we are su ering without even
seeming to realize that su ering is involved. This is a new nation,
created in ambivalence, with idealistic individuality contending
with sel sh individualism. From the very beginning it was Je erson
versus Hamilton, the democratic dream versus the autocratic reality
of hard money and the bank, social justice vs. a narrow
interpretation of law and order.

Individualism run rampant, an arrogant disregard for the views and
the welfare of our fellow man, was the root of the Iran-contra
debacle, which brought the Great Communicator down from his
mythic high. Small wonder in such an atmosphere that a lieutenant
colonel in the U.S. Marines became his own CIA and State
Department, wheeling 
and dealing with 
foreign 
countries,

international arms dealers, Swiss bank accounts and rebels in Miami
who dreamed of the good old days of Somoza while they gobbled up
those mysterious millions.

In the closing lines of What Makes Sammy Run? I had described

his meteoric career “as a blueprint of a way of life that was paying
dividends in America in the  rst half of the twentieth century.”
Well, with our takeover artists, our inside traders, our Ivan Boeskys
and Mike Milkens, our Ollie Norths, our college football heroes on
the take from  lthy rich alumni, our New York City commissioners
compromised almost to a man (and woman), all signs point to even
bigger dividends for the Sammy Glicks in the remainder of this
century, and on into the next.

The book I had written as an attack on antisocial behavior has

become a how- to book on Looking Out for Number 1. Change that
line of the old hymn to read, “America, America, God shed His grace
on me.” Let’s hear it for me, me, me!

Who needs free milk and hot lunches for poor kids in school?

Who needs loans and assistance for high-school graduates who can’t
go on to college for lack of bread? It’s Darwin Time: survival of the
 ttest! Sure, all people are created equal. Only Sammy Glick is
created more equal than the Schleppers, get it?

O.K. That’s how they’re reading it in 1989. And if that’s the way

they go on reading it, marching behind the  ag of Sammy Glick,
with a big dollar sign in the square where the stars used to be, the
twentieth-century version of Sammy is going to look like an Eagle
Scout compared to the twenty- rst. 
 

BUDD SCHULBERG                      

Brookside, Quiogue, New York 

June 1989                            

OceanofPDF.com

