Dorothy L. Sayers: Whose Body?

(1923) 

Ann Martin (University of Saskatchewan)

Genre: Crime and Detective, Novel. Country: England. 

Whose Body? is Dorothy Leigh Sayers’s first novel as well as the first of eleven that would feature the amateur
detective Lord Peter Wimsey. Sayers had finished the manuscript in November 1921. After rejections from
other houses, it was published in 1923 by Boni and Liveright of New York and by T. Fisher Unwin of London. It
was also serialized by People’s Magazine. The novel met with favourable reviews and “encouraging enough” sales
(Hitchman 62), and was republished first in 1925, marking Sayers’s rise to fame as a detective fiction writer.

While Sayers had begun her writing career by publishing rather conventional poetry in the volumes Op.1 (1916)
and Catholic Tales and Christian Songs (1919), she would be best known for her novels and short stories from the
1920s and 1930s, which were informed by her participation in the Detection Club, a group of mystery writers
that included G. K. Chesterton and Agatha Christie. In the 1940s, she embarked upon a new phase of her career,
becoming, in the words of her obituary in the Times, a “Christian apologist”. Her highly accessible translation of
Dante’s Divine Comedy was finished by Dr. Barbara Reynolds in 1962, but Sayers’s explorations of morality are
also evident in her detective fiction, in her plays for the Canterbury Festival, and in her twelve-part radio play on
the life of Christ, The Man Born to be King (1941-42). Sayers’s adaptation of the Gospels shocked some BBC
listeners, as she used modern language and speech patterns to bring the characters to life. She would tread the
line between modernity and tradition throughout her career with great care and with a fine sense of her own
moment.

Whose Body? introduces that balancing act, which the Oxford-educated Sayers experienced for herself while
working at the London advertising agency, S. H. Benson. By 1922, she was living in Bloomsbury, a hub for
artists and intellectuals that had provided a name for Virginia Woolf’s circle—and a sense of the modern for
Sayers. In an era defined by the modernist rejection of Victorian and Edwardian strictures on art and life, Sayers
lived the possibilities that were becoming available to professional women. She was among the first group of
women to receive degrees from Oxford in 1920 and was only the second female copywriter hired by Benson’s.
She was also living independently of her parents, the Reverend Henry Sayers and his wife, Helen. And she was
exploring her own desires. Following a frustrating relationship with the novelist John Cournos, she began dating
Bill White, a mechanic who would teach her how to maintain her own motorcycle.

An unexpected result of their connexion was that Sayers became pregnant in the spring of 1923. As a single
woman, Sayers’s position was untenable in her still-restrictive society. She chose to hide the pregnancy from her
family, friends, and co-workers, and not long after, the relationship with White was ended. She gave birth to her

son John Anthony in January 1924 and returned to Benson’s following “an absence of only eight weeks”
(Brabazon 100). It was her advertising work and, subsequently, the royalties from the Wimsey series, which
enabled her to support her son, who was raised discreetly by her cousin, Ivy Shrimpton, in Oxford. Not
surprisingly, a consistent feature of Sayers’s work is the tension between the public face that is expected or
accepted, and the personal realities that are often at odds with the social façade.

Lord Peter Wimsey became the figure through which Sayers would explore her cultural moment, a moment
shaped irrevocably by challenges to tradition and traditional social structures, particularly in the wake of the
Great War. At once a symbol of the British establishment and a sign of its necessary transformation, Wimsey is a
fascinating combination of character traits, which are sketched out in the first pages of Whose Body? On one
hand, his title and his membership in the prestigious Savile Club indicate his social standing; his top hat and
frock coat indicate both his wealth and his awareness of dress codes; and his intended
destination—Brocklebury’s—indicates his status as a scholar educated at Eton and at Balliol College, Oxford.
That he plans to obtain a Folio Dante (glossed in one of Sayers’s self-reflexively academic footnotes as “the first
Florence edition, 1481, by Niccolo di Lorenzo” [3]) suggests the character’s ties to a medieval social structure
based on God-given place. He is, we learn, the younger son of the late Duke of Denver. However, Sayers
combines such allusions to tradition and landed privilege with references to the very modern world in which
Wimsey exists. At the start of the novel, Wimsey is in the midst of the crowded and confusing cityscape of
London, directing his taxi-driver to cut past two omnibuses and a bicycle. It’s a setting that involves new
technologies, too, including the telephone, which was still “a novelty in some quarters” in the early 1920s
(Scowcroft 70). After the phone call he receives informing him that a body has been found in an apartment in
Battersea, Lord Peter changes his clothes, shifts from being a flâneur to becoming a detective, and reaches the
crime scene before the police do.

The Battersea Park mystery is itself linked directly to the tension between tradition and modernity, and
especially to prejudices pertaining to class and religion, as presented through three separate but ultimately
interrelated events. Mr. Thipps, a middle-class architect, discovers a corpse in the bathtub of his Battersea flat.
Sir Reuben Levy, a highly successful Jewish businessman who has married “above” his station, disappears.
Third, and revealed later in the novel, an anonymous day-labourer dies of an injury in St. Luke’s Hospital.Sayers
uses these three outsider figures to probe the bigotries of interwar British society, where convenient stereotypes
replace real understanding for all, it would seem, but Wimsey and his colleagues. When Wimsey is asked to help
Thipps and to solve the mystery of the body in the bath, he finds himself assisting Detective Charles Parker of
Scotland Yard to find the missing financier. Their joint investigation—in which they are aided by Lord Peter’s
valet, Mervyn Bunter, who demonstrates his skill in photographing fingerprints and deriving information from
fellow servants—indicates the overlapping nature not just of the crimes but also of the city and indeed the
nation. As the detective-protagonist who must restore order, Wimsey displays a necessary knowledge of social
and cultural norms that extends well beyond his own circle.

His encompassing social vision and his ability to collaborate are the traits that set Wimsey apart from the
bumbling Inspector Sugg, who is officially in charge of the murder investigation. Sugg’s reliance upon easy
judgements leads to significant errors, which Wimsey and Parker bring to light. Unlike Lord Peter, Inspector
Sugg looks merely at the surface of the naked body found in Thipps’s apartment and assumes that the corpse
must be that of the Jewish businessman. Wimsey, however, sees not just beyond race but also beyond
appearances, and realizes that the body has been manipulated to hide the man’s class origins. Sugg is also too
ready to believe in Thipps’s guilt, and thus shares the prejudices of the architect’s class-conscious neighbours, the
Appledores, who fear scandal by association more than a miscarriage of justice. Biases rather than realities
inform such reactions, as evidenced by Suggs’s decision to arrest Thipps’s maid Gladys Horrocks because he
considers “the girl’s manner to be suspicious” (67).

In contrast, Wimsey does not base his analyses upon narrow expectations of behaviour. Though a gold pince-nez

suggests the corpse is a wealthy man, he notes that the glasses seem to have been made for a much older
individual. Similarly, the depression left in the bedclothes, which appear to have been slept in by Sir Reuben, is
four inches shorter than it should be. Wimsey’s freedom from ill-advised prejudice is echoed and indeed enabled
by his personal connections to disparate members of his society. That sense of community is encapsulated when
he is called to the case by his mother, the Dowager Duchess. A member of the aristocracy, she has been
contacted by the wife of the vicar at Denver, who has herself been contacted by Thipps, the architect who
redesigned the church roof for the village. Class differences are not unimportant in this world, but Sayers shows
how these individuals rely upon each other in a supportive network of social relations. Wimsey is subsequently
involved in the Levy case because Detective Parker is his personal friend, and his mother’s own friendship with
Lady Levy provides Wimsey with a crucial piece of the puzzle. In telling her son of “the dreadful trouble there
was about her marrying a Jew” (27), the Dowager Duchess not only highlights the social marginalization that the
former Christine Ford experienced when she married Reuben Levy; she also alerts him to Sir Julian Freke’s
lasting admiration for Lady Levy. Freke, a brilliant physician, psychoanalyst, and surgeon, offers his support in
Lady Levy’s time of grief, and he gives Parker a clearer sense of Sir Reuben’s whereabouts on the night of his
disappearance.

Sayers and the “detective novel of manners” have been challenged for depicting a troublingly nostalgic vision of
Britain. Most notably, Carolyn Heilbrun has pointed out “the easy racism of Sayers’s novels, the anti-Semitism
and anti-black assumptions” (236). Similarly, Robert Kuhn McGregor and Ethan Lewis have argued that Sir
Reuben Levy “is a classic stock character” (30), and that Sayers reflects the dominant attitudes of her day,
especially in her “hackneyed portrayal of Jewish people” (31). However, novels such as Whose Body? also
explore the prejudices and stereotypes that Sayers invokes through her characters and their comments.
Ostensibly marginal members of British society—lesbian characters, working-class figures, members of the
African diaspora—are central to Sayers’s fiction. Indeed, they represent the nodal points through which she
depicts and critiques systems predicated upon unthinking privilege, false hierarchies, and hypocrisies at all
levels.

Of course, such critique has much to do with the consequences of World War I; the trauma of the war, as well as
its challenge to ontological and social certainties, is examined through Lord Peter’s lingering experience of
shellshock. As he moves closer to solving the mystery of Sir Reuben’s disappearance and is faced with a major
and inevitable decision—not just to reveal the murderer’s identity, but to thus destroy a source of valuable social
service—he suffers a breakdown. The responsibility has taken him back to the trenches and to the psychological
price he has paid for leading his men into battle. When he retreats to the family estate at Denver in order to
recuperate in the care of his former Sergeant, Bunter, we see how private experiences of war have disrupted
Wimsey’s public role. The return of the traumatic memory indicates what Freke later observes: “the strain you
put on your nerves during the war has left its mark on you” (120). The war has left its mark on the novel, too. On
the cusp of an understatedly climactic confrontation with the murderer, Lord Peter compares his situation to his
role as a spy infiltrating a German officer’s staff-room. And as the case nears its close, Wimsey is taken back to
a muddy No Man’s Land to witness the exhumation of a body in the cemetery.

The style in which Sayers depicts that experience is striking, and it stands as just one of her experimentations
with narration and point of view in Whose Body? As in Chapter X, the scene is presented in the second person,
and it plunges the reader into Lord Peter’s perceptions of the dark, foggy, hellish graveyard in which the post-
mortem takes place. Wimsey’s disorientation is highly significant, for Sayers establishes a parallel between Lord
Peter and Mr. Piggott, the medical student from Chapter X who is clearly out of his depth in Wimsey’s
sophisticated apartment. We realize the younger man’s sense of inadequacy through the second-person narrative
and are privy to his outsider’s impressions of his social superiors, even as he provides Wimsey and Parker with
the evidence they require to solve both mysteries. But it is Wimsey’s own lack of mastery in the muddy
graveyard that is notable, for it suggests the limits of the “hero” and returns him to his role as shell-shocked
veteran. His references to the Inferno suggest the depths of his suffering: cemetery workers are described as

“Dantesque shapes with pitchforks” and “demons”, and the men and women in black who attend the exhumation
are seen as “spectres” (124).

The allusions to Dante, which crop up consistently in the text, are accompanied by equally numerous references
to Arthur Conan Doyle. Here, tradition is paired with modernity, for Wimsey is a link between Dante’s
explorations of the afterlife and its sinners and saints, and Sherlock Holmes’s investigations of the city and its
criminals. In Whose Body? a medieval, moral order is matched with modern, scientific inquiry through the
aristocrat’s interest in detecting. It becomes a problematic hobby, though: Lord Peter cannot claim a financial or
professional reason for his investigations, since he is an amateur; nor can he take the sportsman’s approach, in
which detecting is merely a game, since the emotional and social consequences are much too grave. Instead, and
as Parker tells him bluntly, Wimsey must do his “duty to society” regardless of the stances or attitudes he might
strike in so doing (86). That notion of duty reveals the most important facet of Sayers’s construction of her
protagonist: his grounding in the concept of noblesse oblige, or the obligation of the nobleman to his community.

Adherence to an inherited, moral obligation is where Lord Peter differs from the esteemed scientist, Sir Julian
Freke, who posits “The knowledge of good and evil is an observed phenomenon, attendant upon a certain
condition of the brain-cells, which is removable” (90, emphasis mine). Scientific inquiry in which morality is a
condition of blood and tissue, and can thus be transcended, is not Lord Peter’s path to order; nor is a return to a
social structure based upon hypocritical prejudices and outworn traditions. Sayers’s detective rejects both
extremes, embracing neither a sterile individualism nor a hollow class privilege, and struggles to create a new
space and a new meaning for the aristocrat in modernity (note).

To do so, Wimsey relies upon fact rather than prejudice. His method is to focus not on perceived or possible
motivations, but on opportunity as the key element in solving the crime. The means of the murder will point to
the murderer; the ability and the capacity to carry out the crime are what matter, and all else must rest upon
those material considerations. Through such an approach, Wimsey is able to apply scholarly reason to evidence
garnered from a range of witnesses and colleagues in order to determine the guilty party. But he tempers his
judgements with human grace. Thus, in his final meeting with the murderer, he subtly signals that he has solved
the case out of respect for the reputation and the good work that will now be stopped by his actions. While
hubris prevents the murderer from heeding Lord Peter’s warning, the meeting itself demonstrates Wimsey’s
ability to see beyond the crime into the larger social and human contexts to which it is inextricably linked.

It is Wimsey’s self-conscious awareness of cultural traditions, social norms, and the relationship between public
face and personal reality that enables him to unravel the intertwined mysteries of the novel, and to determine not
just whose body is in the bathtub, but also whose body is capable of the crime, and whose body matters in the
hierarchies of 1920s London.

Note

I am indebted to the work of Robin Anderson here, who pointed out this distinction, especially as it pertains to
Sayers’s references to Dante.

Works Cited

Brabazon, James. Dorothy L. Sayers. Don Mills, ON: General Publishing, 1981. Print.
Heilbrun, Carolyn G. “The Detective Novel of Manners.” Hamlet’s Mother and Other Women. New York:
Columbia UP, 1990. 231-43. Print.
Hitchman, Janet. Such a Strange Lady: An Introduction to Dorothy L. Sayers (1893-1957). London: New English
Library, 1975. Print.
McGregor, Robert Kuhn, with Ethan Lewis. Conundrums for the Long Week-End: England, Dorothy L. Sayers,

and Lord Peter Wimsey. Kent, OH: Kent State UP, 2000. Print.
“Miss Dorothy L. Sayers: Christian Apologist and Novelist.” Obituary. The Times. 19 December 1957: 12.
Sayers, Dorothy L. Whose Body? 1923. Mineola, NY: Dover, 2009. Print.
Scowcroft, P. L. “The Detective Fiction of Dorothy L. Sayers: A Source for the Social Historian?” Seven 5
(1984): 70-83. Print.

Ann Martin (University of Saskatchewan)

Citation: Martin, Ann. "Whose Body? ". The Literary Encyclopedia. First published 06 September 2012 
[https://www.litencyc.com, accessed 16 February 2022.]

This article is copyright to © The Literary Encyclopedia.

All entries, data and software copyright © The Literary Dictionary Company Limited

ISSN 1747-678X

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

