ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Daniel C. Dennett is Distinguished Professor of Arts and Sciences and
Director of the Center for Cognitive Studies at Tufts University,
DARWIN'S

Massachusetts. He is also the author of Content and Consciousness (1969);
Brainstorms (1978; Penguin, 1997); Elbow Room (1984); The Intentional
Stance (1987); Consciousness Explained (1992; Penguin, 1993); and Kinds
of Minds (1996).

DANGEROUS

IDEA

EVOLUTION AND THE

MEANINGS OF LIFE

Daniel C. Dennett

PENGUIN BOOKS

To VAN QUINE

Published by the Penguin Group

teacher and friend

Penguin Books Ltd, 27 Wrights Lane, London W8 5TZ, England Penguin
Books USA Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA
Penguin Books Australia Ltd, Ringwood, Victoria, Australia Penguin Books
Canada Ltd, 10 Alcorn Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4V 3B2

Penguin Books (NZ) Ltd, 182-190 Wairau Road, Auckland 10, New
Zealand Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: Harmondsworth,
Middlesex, England First published in the USA by Simon & Schuster 1995

First published in Great Britain by Allen Lane The Penguin Press 1995

Published in Penguin Books 1996

3579 10 864

Copyright © Daniel C. Dennett, 1995

All rights reserved

The acknowledgements on p. 587 constitute an extension of this copyright
page The moral right of the author has been asserted

Printed in England by Clays Ltd, St Ives pic

Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the
condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold,
hired out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior consent in
any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published and
without a similar condition including this condition being imposed on the
subsequent purchaser Contents

Preface

PART I: STARTING IN THE MIDDLE

CHAPTER ONE

Tell Me Why

1. Is Nothing Sacred? 17

2. What, Where, When, Why—and How? 23

3. Locke's "Proof" of the Primacy of Mind 26

4. Hume's Close Encounter 28

CHAPTER TWO

An Idea Is Born

1. What Is So Special About Species? 35

2. Natural Selection—an Awful Stretcher 39

3. Did Darwin Explain the Origin of Species? 42

4. Natural Selection as an Algorithmic Process 48

5. Processes as Algorithms 52

CHAPTER THREE

Universal Acid

1. Early Reactions 61

2. Darwin's Assault on the Cosmic Pyramid 64

3. The Principle of the Accumulation of Design 68

4. The Tools for R and D: Skyhooks or Cranes? 73

5. Who's Afraid of Reductionism? 80

8 CONTENTS

Contents 9

CHAPTER FOUR

CHAPTER NINE

The Tree of Life

Searching for Quality

1. How Should We Visualize the Tree of Life? 85

1. The Power of Adaptationist Thinking 229

2. Color-coding a Species on the Tree 91

2. The Leibnizian Paradigm 238

3. Retrospective Coronations: Mitochondrial Eve and 3. Playing with
Constraints 251

Invisible Beginnings 96

CHAPTER TEN

4. Patterns, Oversimplification, and Explanation 100

Bully for Brontosaurus

CHAPTER FIVE

1. The Boy Who Cried Wolf? 262

The Possible and the Actual

2. The Spandrel's Thumb 267

1. Grades of Possibility? 104

3. Punctuated Equilibrium: A Hopeful Monster 282

2. The Library of Mendel 107

4. Tinker to Evers to Chance: The Burgess Shale

3. The Complex Relation Between Genome and Organism 113

Double-Play Mystery 299

4. Possibility Naturalized 118

CHAPTER ELEVEN

Controversies Contained

CHAPTER SIX

Threads of Actuality in Design Space

1. A Clutch of Harmless Heresies 313

2. Three Losers: Teilhard, Lamarck, and Directed

1. Drifting and Lifting Through Design Space 124

Mutation 320

2. Forced Moves in the Game of Design 128

3. CuiBono? 324

3. The Unity of Design Space 135

PART III: MIND, MEANING, MATHEMATICS, AND MORALITY

PART II: DARWINIAN THINKING IN BIOLOGY

CHAPTER TWELVE

CHAPTER SEVEN

The Cranes of Culture

Priming Darwin's Pump

1. The Monkey's Uncle Meets the Meme 335

1. Back Beyond Darwin's Frontier 149

2. Invasion of the Body-Snatchers 342

2. Molecular Evolution 155

3. Could There Be a Science of Memetics? 352

3. The Laws of the Game of Life 163

4. The Philosophical Importance of Memes 361

4. Eternal Recurrence—Life Without Foundations? 181

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

CHAPTER EIGHT

Losing Our Minds to Darwin

Biology Is Engineering

1. The Role of Language in Intelligence 370

1. The Sciences of the Artificial 187

2. Chomsky Contra Darwin: Four Episodes 384 3.

2. Darwin Is Dead—Long Live Darwin! 190

Nice Tries 393

3. Function and Specification 195

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

4. Original Sin and the Birth of Meaning 200

The Evolution of Meanings

5. The Computer That Learned to Play Checkers 207

6. Artifact Hermeneutics, or Reverse Engineering 212

1. The Quest for Real Meaning 401

7. Stuart Kauffman as Meta-Engineer 220

2. Two Black Boxes 412

10 CONTENTS

3. Blocking the Exits 419

4. Safe Passage to the Future 422

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

The Emperor's New Mind, and Other Fables 428

Preface

1. The Sword in the Stone 428

2. The Library of Toshiba 437

3. The Phantom Quantum-Gravity Computer:

Lessons from Lapland 444

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

On the Origin of Morality

1. E Pluribus Unum? 453

2. Friedrich Nietzsche's Just So Stories 461

Darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection has always fascinated me,
3. Some Varieties of Greedy Ethical Reductionism 467

but over the years I have found a surprising variety of thinkers who cannot
4. Sociobiology: Good and Bad, Good and Evil 481

conceal their discomfort with his great idea, ranging from nagging
skepticism to outright hostility. I have found not just lay people and
religious CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

thinkers, but secular philosophers, psychologists, physicists, and even biol-
Redesigning Morality

ogists who would prefer, it seems, that Darwin were wrong. This book is
about why Darwin's idea is so powerful, and why it promises—not threat-1.
Can Ethics Be Naturalized? 494

ens—to put our most cherished visions of life on a new foundation.

2. Judging the Competition 501

A few words about method. This book is largely about science but is not 3.
The Moral First Aid Manual 505

itself a work of science. Science is not done by quoting authorities, however
eloquent and eminent, and then evaluating their arguments. Scientists do,
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

however, quite properly persist in holding forth, in popular and not-so-The
Future of an Idea

popular books and essays, putting forward their interpretations of the work
1. In Praise of Biodiversity 511

in the lab and the field, and trying to influence their fellow scientists. When
I quote them, rhetoric and all, I am doing what they are doing: engaging in
2. Universal Acid: Handle with Care 521

persuasion. There is no such thing as a sound Argument from Authority, but
authorities can be persuasive, sometimes rightly and sometimes wrongly. I
try to sort this all out, and I myself do not understand all the science that is
relevant to the theories I discuss, but, then, neither do the scientists (with
perhaps a few polymath exceptions). Interdisciplinary work has its risks. I
have gone into the details of the various scientific issues far enough, I hope,
to let the uninformed reader see just what the issues are, and why I put the
interpretation on them that I do, and I have provided plenty of references.

Names with dates refer to full references given in the bibliography at the
back of the book. Instead of providing a glossary of the technical terms
used, I define them briefly when I first use them, and then often clarify their
meaning in later discussion, so there is a very extensive index, which will
let you survey all occurrences of any term or idea in the book. Footnotes are
for digressions that some but not all readers will appreciate or require.

12 PREFACE

Preface 13

One thing I have tried to do in this book is to make it possible for you to
infighting, and whenever I glide swiftly by a controversy, I warn that I am
read the scientific literature I cite, by providing a unified vision of the field,
doing so, and give the reader references to the opposition. The bibliography
along with suggestions about the importance or non-importance of the
could easily have been doubled, but I have chosen on the principle that any
controversies that rage. Some of the disputes I boldly adjudicate, and others
I serious reader needs only one or two entry points into the literature and

can leave wide open but place in a framework so that you can see what the
issues find die rest from there.

are, and whether it matters—to you—how they come out. I hope you will
read this literature, for it is packed with wonderful ideas. Some of the books
I cite are among the most difficult books I have ever read. I think of the
books In the front of his marvelous new book, Metaphysical Myths,
Mathematical by Stuart Kauffman and Roger Penrose, for instance, but they
are Practices: The Ontology and Epistemology of the Exact Sciences (Cam-
pedagogical tours deforce of highly advanced materials, and they can and
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), my colleague Jody Azzouni
should be read by anyone who wants to have an informed opinion about the
thanks "the philosophy department at Tufts University for providing a near-
important issues they raise. Others are less demanding—clear, informative,
perfect environment in which to do philosophy." I want to second both the
well worth some serious effort—and still others are not just easy to read but
a thanks and the evaluation. At many universities, philosophy is studied but
not great delight—superb examples of Art in the service of Science. Since
you done—"philosophy appreciation," one might call it—and at many other
are reading this book, you have prqbably already read several of them, so
my universities, philosophical research is an arcane activity conducted out
of grouping them together here will be recommendation enough: the books
by sight of the undergraduates and all but the most advanced postgraduates.
At Graham Cairns-Smith, Bill Calvin, Richard Dawkins, Jared Diamond,
Manfred Tufts, we do philosophy, in the classroom and among our
colleagues, and the Eigen, Steve Gould, John Maynard Smith, Steve Pinker,
Mark Ridley, and Matt results, I think, show that Azzouni's assessment is
correct. Tufts has provided Ridley. No area of science has been better
served by its writers than me with excellent students and colleagues, and an
ideal setting in which to evolutionary theory.

work with them. In recent years I have taught an undergraduate seminar on
Highly technical philosophical arguments of the sort many philosophers
Darwin and philosophy, in which most of the ideas in this book were favor
are absent here. That is because I have a prior problem to deal with. I
hammered out. The penultimate draft was probed, criticized, and polished
by have learned that arguments, no matter how watertight, often fall on deaf

a particularly strong seminar of graduate and undergraduate students, for
ears. I am myself the author of arguments that I consider rigorous and
whose help I am grateful: Karen Bailey, Pascal Buckley, John Cabral, Brian
unanswerable but that are often not so much rebutted or even dismissed as
Cavoto, Tim Chambers, Shiraz Cupala, Jennifer Fox, Angela Giles, Patrick
simply ignored. I am not complaining about injustice—we all must ignore
Hawley, Dien Ho, Matthew Kessler, Chris Lerner, Kristin McGuire,
Michael arguments, and no doubt we all ignore arguments that history will
tell us we Ridge, John Roberts, Lee Rosenberg, Stacey Schmidt, Rhett
Smith, Laura should have taken seriously. Rather, I want to play a more
direct role in Spiliatakou, and Scott Tanona. The seminar was also enriched
by frequent changing what is ignorable by whom. I want to get thinkers in
other disci-visitors: Marcel Kinsbourne, Bo Dahlbom, David Haig, Cynthia
plines to take evolutionary thinking seriously, to show them how they have
Schossberger, Jeff McConnell, David Stipp. I also want to thank my been
underestimating it, and to show them why they have been listening to
colleagues, especially Hugo Bedau, George Smith, and Stephen White, for a
the wrong sirens. For this, I have to use more artful methods. I have to tell a
variety of valuable suggestions. And I must especially thank Alicia Smith,
the story. You don't want to be swayed by a story? Well, I know you won't
be secretary at the Center for Cognitive Studies, whose virtuoso
performance as swayed by a formal argument; you won't even listen to a
formal argument for a reference-finder, fact-checker, permission-seeker,
draft-updater/printer/

my conclusion, so I start where I have to start.

mailer, and general coordinator of the whole project put wings on my heels.

The story I tell is mostly new, but it also pulls together bits and pieces I
have also benefited from detailed comments from those who read most or
from a wide assortment of analyses I've written over the last twenty-five all
the penultimate-draft chapters: Bo Dahlbom, Richard Dawkins, David
years, directed at various controversies and quandaries. Some of these
pieces Haig, Doug Hofstadter, Nick Humphrey, Ray Jackendoff, Philip
Kitcher, Jus-are incorporated into the book almost whole, with
improvements, and others tin Leiber, Ernst Mayr, Jeff McConnell, Steve

Pinker, Sue Stafford, and Kim are only alluded to. What I have made visible
here is enough of the tip of the Sterelny. As usual, they are not responsible
for any errors they failed to iceberg, I hope, to inform and even persuade the
newcomer and at least dissuade me from. (And if you can't write a good
book about evolution witii challenge my opponents fairly and crisply. I
have tried to navigate between the help of this sterling group of editors, you
should give up!) the Scylla of glib dismissal and the Charybdis of
grindingly detailed Many others answered crucial questions, and clarified
my thinking in 14 PREFACE

dozens of conversations: Ron Amundsen, Robert Axelrod, Jonathan
Bennett, Robert Brandon, Madeline Caviness, Tim Clutton-Brock, Leda
Cosmides, Helena Cronin, Arthur Danto, Mark De Voto, Marc Feldman,
Murray Gell-Mann, Peter Godfrey-Smith, Steve Gould, Danny Hillis, John
Holland, Alas-tair Houston, David Hoy, Bredo Johnsen, Stu Kauffman,
Chris Langton, Dick PART 1

Lewontin, John Maynard Smith, Jim Moore, Roger Penrose, Joanne
Phillips, Robert Richards, Mark and Matt (the Ridley conspecifics), Dick
Schacht, Jeff Schank, Elliot Sober, John Tooby, Robert Trivers, Peter Van
Inwagen, George Williams, David Sloan Wilson, Edward O. Wilson, and
BUI Wimsatt.

I want to thank my agent, John Brockman, for steering this big project past
STARTING IN THE

many shoals, and helping me see ways of making it a better book. Thanks
also go to Terry Zaroff, whose expert copyediting caught many slips and
inconsistencies, and clarified and unified the expression of many points.
And M

Ilavenil Subbiah, who drew the figures, except for Figures 10.3 and 10.4,
IDDLE

which were created by Mark McConnell on a Hewlett-Packard Apollo
workstation, using I-dea.

Last and most important: thanks and love to my wife, Susan, for her advice,
love, and support.

DANIEL DENNETT

September 1994

Neurath has likened science to a boat which, if we are to rebuild it, we must
rebuild plank by plank while staying afloat in it. The philosopher and the
scientist are in the same boat....

Analyze theory-building how we will, we all must start in die middle.

Our conceptual firsts are middle-sized, middle-distanced objects, and our
introduction to diem and to everything comes midway in the cultural
evolution of die race. In assimilating this cultural fare we are litde more
aware of a distinction between report and invention, substance and style,
cues and conceptualization, than we are of a distinction between die
proteins and the carbohydrates of our material intake.

Retrospectively we may distinguish the components of theory-building, as
we distinguish the proteins and carbohydrates while subsisting on diem.

—WILURD VAN ORMAN QUINE I960, pp. 4-6

1. Is NOTHING SACRED?

CHAPTER ONE

Tell Me Why

We used to sing a lot when I was a child, around the campfire at summer
camp, at school and Sunday school, or gathered around the piano at home.

One of my favorite songs was "Tell Me Why." (For those whose personal
memories don't already embrace this little treasure, the music is provided in
the appendix. The simple melody and easy harmony line are surprisingly
beautiful.)

Tell me why the stars do shine,

Tell me why the ivy twines,

Tell me why die sky's so blue.

Then I will tell you just why I love you.

Because God made the stars to shine, Because

God made the ivy twine, Because God made

the sky so blue. Because God made you, that's

why I love you.

This straightforward, sentimental declaration still brings a lump to my
throat—so sweet, so innocent, so reassuring a vision of life!

And then along comes Darwin and spoils the picnic. Or does he? That is the
topic of this book. From the moment of the publication of Origin of Species
in 1859, Charles Darwin's fundamental idea has inspired intense reactions
ranging from ferocious condemnation to ecstatic allegiance, sometimes
tantamount to religious zeal. Darwin's theory has been abused and
misrepresented by friend and foe alike. It has been misappropriated to lend
scientific respectability to appalling political and social doctrines. It has
been pilloried in caricature by opponents, some of whom would have it 18
TELL ME WHY

Is Nothing Sacred? 19

compete in our children's schools with "creation science," a pathetic hodge-
irresistible parts. Then—if we were lucky—perhaps the rock-solid scientific
podge of pious pseudo-science.1

facts would have no stunning implications about religion, or human nature,
Almost no one is indifferent to Darwin, and no one should be. The Dar-or
the meaning of life, while the parts of Darwin's idea that get people all
winian theory is a scientific theory, and a great one, but that is not all it is.

upset could be put into quarantine as highly controversial extensions of, or
The creationists who oppose it so bitterly are right about one thing:
Darwin's mere interpretations of, the scientifically irresistible parts. That
would be dangerous idea cuts much deeper into the fabric of our most
fundamental reassuring.

beliefs than many of its sophisticated apologists have yet admitted, even to
But alas, that is just about backwards. There are vigorous controversies
themselves.

swirling around in evolutionary theory, but those who feel threatened by
The sweet, simple vision of the song, taken literally, is one that most of us
Darwinism should not take heart from this fact. Most—if not quite all—of
have outgrown, however fondly we may recall it. The kindly God who the
controversies concern issues that are "just science"; no matter which side
lovingly fashioned each and every one of us ( all creatures great and small)
wins, the outcome will not undo the basic Darwinian idea. That idea, which
and sprinkled the sky with shining stars for our delight— that God is, like is
about as secure as any in science, really does have far-reaching Santa Claus,
a myth of childhood, not anything a sane, undeluded adult could
implications for our vision of what the meaning of life is or could be.

literally believe in. That God must either be turned into a symbol for In
1543, Copernicus proposed that the Earth was not the center of the
something less concrete or abandoned altogether.

universe but in fact revolved around the Sun. It took over a century for the
Not all scientists and philosophers are atheists, and many who are believ-
idea to sink in, a gradual and actually rather painless transformation. (The
ers declare that their idea of God can live in peaceful coexistence with, or
religious reformer Philipp Melanchthon, a collaborator of Martin Luther,
even find support from, the Darwinian framework of ideas. Theirs is not an
opined that "some Christian prince" should suppress this madman, but aside
anthropomorphic Handicrafter God, but still a God worthy of worship in
their from a few such salvos, the world was not particularly shaken by
Copernicus eyes, capable of giving consolation and meaning to their lives.
Others ground himself.) The Copernican Revolution did eventually have its
own "shot heard their highest concerns in entirely secular philosophies,

views of the meaning round the world": Galileo's Dialogue Concerning the
Two Chief World of life that stave off despair without the aid of any concept
of a Supreme Systems, but it was not published until 1632, when the issue
was no longer Being—other than the Universe itself. Something is sacred to
these thinkers, controversial among scientists. Galileo's projectile provoked
an infamous but they do not call it God; they call it, perhaps, Life, or Love,
or Goodness, response by the Roman Catholic Church, setting up a shock
wave whose or Intelligence, or Beauty, or Humanity. What both groups
share, in spite of reverberations are only now dying out. But in spite of the
drama of that epic the differences in their deepest creeds, is a conviction
that life does have confrontation, the idea that our planet is not the center of
creation has sat meaning, that goodness matters.

rather lightly in people's minds. Every schoolchild today accepts this as the
But can any version of this attitude of wonder and purpose be sustained in
matter of fact it is, without tears or terror.

the face of Darwinism? From the outset, there have been those who thought
In due course, the Darwinian Revolution will come to occupy a similarly
they saw Darwin letting the worst possible cat out of the bag: nihilism.
They secure and untroubled place in the minds—and hearts—of every
educated thought that if Darwin was right, the implication would be that
nothing could person on the globe, but today, more than a century after
Darwin's death, we be sacred. To put it bluntly, nothing could have any
point. Is this just an still have not come to terms with its mind-boggling
implications. Unlike the overreaction? What exactly are the implications of
Darwin's idea—and, in Copernican Revolution, which did not engage
widespread public attention any case, has it been scientifically proven or is
it still "just a theory"?

until the scientific details had been largely sorted out, the Darwinian
Perhaps, you may think, we could make a useful division: there are the
Revolution has had anxious lay spectators and cheerleaders taking sides
from parts of Darwin's idea that really are established beyond any
reasonable the outset, tugging at the sleeves of the participants and
encouraging doubt, and then there are the speculative extensions of the
scientifically grandstanding. The scientists themselves have been moved by

the same hopes and fears, so it is not surprising that die relatively narrow
conflicts among theorists have often been not just blown up out of
proportion by their 1. I will not devote any space in this book to cataloguing
the deep flaws in creationism, adherents, but seriously distorted in the
process. Everybody has seen, dimly, or supporting my peremptory
condemnation of it. I take that job to have been admirably that a lot is at
stake.

done by Kitcher 1982, Futuyma 1983, Gilkey 1985, and others.

Moreover, although Darwin's own articulation of his theory was
monumental, and its powers were immediately recognized by many of the
scien-20 TELL ME WHY

Is Nothing Sacred? 21

tists and other thinkers of his day, there really were large gaps in his theory
are carefully left unarticulated, displaced from attention by several layers of
that have only recently begun to be properly filled in. The biggest gap looks
distracting rebuttal and counter-rebuttal. The disputants are forever
changing almost comical in retrospect. In all his brilliant musings, Darwin
never hit the subject slightly, conveniently keeping the bogeys in the
shadows. It is upon the central concept, without which the theory of
evolution is hopeless: this misdirection that is mainly responsible for
postponing the day when we the concept of a gene. Darwin had no proper
unit of heredity, and so his can all live as comfortably with our new
biological perspective as we do with account of the process of natural
selection was plagued with entirely reathe astronomical perspective
Copernicus gave us.

sonable doubts about whether it would work. Darwin supposed that
offspring Whenever Darwinism is the topic, the temperature rises, because
more is at would always exhibit a sort of blend or average of their parents'
features.

stake than just the empirical facts about how life on Earth evolved, or the
Wouldn't such "blending inheritance" always simply average out all differ-
correct logic of the theory that accounts for those facts. One of the precious

ences, turning everything into uniform gray? How could diversity survive
things that is at stake is a vision of what it means to ask, and answer, the
such relentless averaging? Darwin recognized the seriousness of this chal-
question "Why?" Darwin's new perspective turns several traditional
assump-lenge, and neither he nor his many ardent supporters succeeded in
responding tions upside down, undermining our standard ideas about what
ought to count with a description of a convincing and well-documented
mechanism of as satisfying answers to this ancient and inescapable
question. Here science heredity that could combine traits of parents while
maintaining an underlying and philosophy get completely intertwined.
Scientists sometimes deceive and unchanged identity. The idea they needed
was right at hand, uncovered themselves into thinking that philosophical
ideas are only, at best, ("formulated" would be too strong) by the monk
Gregor Mendel and decorations or parasitic commentaries on the hard,
objective triumphs of published in a relatively obscure Austrian journal in
1865, but, in the best-science, and that they themselves are immune to the
confusions that phi-savored irony in the history of science, it lay there
unnoticed until its im-losophers devote their lives to dissolving. But there is
no such thing as portance was appreciated (at first dimly) around 1900. Its
triumphant philosophy-free science; there is only science whose
philosophical baggage establishment at the heart of the "Modern Synthesis"
(in effect, the synthesis is taken on board without examination.

of Mendel and Darwin) was eventually made secure in the 1940s, thanks to
The Darwinian Revolution is both a scientific and a philosophical revo-the
work of Theodosius Dobzhansky, Julian Huxley, Ernst Mayr, and others.

lution, and neither revolution could have occurred without the other. As we
It has taken another half-century to iron out most of the wrinkles of that
new shall see, it was the philosophical prejudices of the scientists, more
than their fabric.

lack of scientific evidence, that prevented them from seeing how the theory
The fundamental core of contemporary Darwinism, the theory of DNA-
could actually work, but those philosophical prejudices that had to be based
reproduction and evolution, is now beyond dispute among scientists. It
overthrown were too deeply entrenched to be dislodged by mere philo-

demonstrates its power every day, contributing crucially to the explanation
of sophical brilliance. It took an irresistible parade of hard-won scientific
facts planet-sized facts of geology and meteorology, through middle-sized
facts of to force thinkers to take seriously the weird new outlook that
Darwin ecology and agronomy, down to the latest microscopic facts of
genetic proposed. Those who are still ill-acquainted with that beautiful
procession engineering. It unifies all of biology and the history of our planet
into a can be forgiven their continued allegiance to the pre-Darwinian ideas.
And single grand story. Like Gulliver tied down in Lilliput, it is unbudge-
able, not the battle is not yet over; even among the scientists, there are
pockets of because of some one or two huge chains of argument that might
— hope resistance.

against hope—have weak links in them, but because it is securely tied by
Let me lay my cards on the table. If I were to give an award for the single
hundreds of thousands of threads of evidence anchoring it to virtually every
best idea anyone has ever had, I'd give it to Darwin, ahead of Newton and
other area of human knowledge. New discoveries may conceivably lead to
Einstein and everyone else. In a single stroke, the idea of evolution by
dramatic, even "revolutionary" shifts in the Darwinian theory, but the hope
natural selection unifies the realm of life, meaning, and purpose with the
that it will be "refuted" by some shattering breakthrough is about as realm
of space and time, cause and effect, mechanism and physical law. But
reasonable as the hope that we will return to a geocentric vision and discard
it is not just a wonderful scientific idea. It is a dangerous idea. My
admiration Copernicus.

for Darwin's magnificent idea is unbounded, but I, too, cherish many of the
Still, the theory is embroiled in remarkably hot-tempered controversy, and
ideas and ideals that it seems to challenge, and want to protect them. For
one of the reasons for this incandescence is that these debates about
scientific instance, I want to protect the campfire song, and what is
beautiful and true matters are usually distorted by fears that the "wrong"
answer would have in it, for my little grandson and his friends, and for their
children when they intolerable moral implications. So great are these fears
that they grow up. There are many more magnificent ideas that are also
jeopardized, 22 TELL ME WHY

What, Where, When, Why—and How? 23

it seems, by Darwin's idea, and they, too, may need protection. The only
was going to be the sticking point for many people, and he did what he
could good way to do this—the only way that has a chance in the long run
—is to to break the news gently. More than a century later, there are still
those who cut through the smokescreens and look at the idea as
unflinchingly, as want to dig a moat separating us from most if not all of the
dreadful dispassionately, as possible.

implications they think they see in Darwinism. Part III shows that this is an
On this occasion, we are not going to settle for "There, there, it will all error
of both fact and strategy; not only does Darwin's dangerous idea apply
come out all right." Our examination will take a certain amount of nerve.

to us directly and at many levels, but the proper application of Darwinian
Feelings may get hurt. Writers on evolution usually steer clear of this ap-
thinking to human issues—of mind, language, knowledge, and ethics, for
parent clash between science and religion. Fools rush in, Alexander Pope
instance—illuminates them in ways that have always eluded the traditional
said, where angels fear to tread. Do you want to follow me? Don't you
really approaches, recasting ancient problems and pointing to dieir solution.

want to know what survives this confrontation? What if it turns out that the
Finally, we can assess the bargain we get when we trade in pre-Darwinian
for sweet vision—or a better one—survives intact, strengthened and
deepened Darwinian thinking, identifying both its uses and abuses, and
showing how by the encounter? Wouldn't it be a shame to forgo the
opportunity for a what really matters to us—and ought to matter to us—
shines through, strengthened, renewed creed, settling instead for a fragile,
sickbed faith that transformed but enhanced by its passage through the
Darwinian Revolution.

you mistakenly supposed must not be disturbed?

There is no future in a sacred myth. Why not? Because of our curiosity.

Because, as the song reminds us, we want to know why. We may have 2.
WHAT, WHERE, WHEN, WHY—AND HOW?

outgrown the song's answer, but we will never outgrow the question.
Whatever we hold precious, we cannot protect it from our curiosity, because
being Our curiosity about things takes different forms, as Aristotle noted at
the who we are, one of the things we deem precious is the truth. Our love of
truth dawn of human science. His pioneering effort to classify them still
makes a is surely a central element in the meaning we find in our lives. In
any case, the lot of sense. He identified four basic questions we might want
answered idea that we might preserve meaning by kidding ourselves is a
more about anything, and called their answers the four aitia, a truly
untranslatable pessimistic, more nihilistic idea than I for one can stomach.
If that were the Greek term traditionally but awkwardly translated the four
"causes."

best that could be done, I would conclude that nothing mattered after all.

This book, then, is for those who agree that the only meaning of life worth
caring about is one that can withstand our best efforts to examine it. Others
(1) We may be curious about what something is made of, its matter or are
advised to close the book now and tiptoe away.

material cause.

For those who stay, here is die plan. Part I of the book locates the (2) We
may be curious about the form (or structure or shape) that that Darwinian
Revolution in the larger scheme of things, showing how it can matter takes,
its formal cause.

transform the world-view of those who know its details. This first chapter
(3) We may be curious about its beginning, how it got started, or its sets out
die background of philosophical ideas that dominated our thought efficient
cause.

before Darwin. Chapter 2 introduces Darwin's central idea in a somewhat
(4) We may be curious about its purpose or goal or end (as in "Do the new
guise, as the idea of evolution as an algorithmic process, and clears up ends

justify the means?" ), which Aristotle called its telos, sometimes some
common misunderstandings of it. Chapter 3 shows how this idea translated
in English, awkwardly, as "final cause."

overturns the tradition encountered in chapter 1. Chapters 4 and 5 explore
some of the striking—and unsettling—perspectives that the Darwinian way
It takes some pinching and shoving to make these four Aristotelian aitia of
thinking opens up.

line up as the answers to the standard English questions "what, where,
when, Part II examines the challenges to Darwin's idea—to neo-Darwinism
or and why." The fit is only fitfully good. Questions beginning with "why,"

the Modern Synthesis—that have arisen within biology itself, showing that
however, do standardly ask for Aristotle's fourth "cause," the telos of a
thing.

contrary to what some of its opponents have declared, Darwin's idea
survives Why this? we ask. What is it/or? As the French say, what is its
raison d'etre, these controversies not just intact but strengthened. Part HI
then shows what or reason for being? For hundreds of years, these "why"
questions have been happens when the same thinking is extended to the
species we care about recognized as problematic by philosophers and
scientists, so distinct that the most: Homo sapiens. Darwin himself fully
recognized that this topic they raise deserves a name: teleology.

24 TELL ME WHY

What, Where, When, Why—and How? 25

A teleological explanation is one that explains the existence or occurrence a
cosmogony, but there are many others. Cosmologists exploring the of
something by citing a goal or purpose that is served by the thing. Artifacts
hypothesis of the Big Bang, and speculating about black holes and super-are
the most obvious cases; the goal or purpose of an artifact is the function it
strings, are present-day creators of cosmogonies. Not all ancient cosmog-
was designed to serve by its creator. There is no controversy about the telos
onies follow the pattern of an artifact-maker. Some involve a "world egg"

of a hammer: it is for hammering in and pulling out nails. The telos of more
laid in "the Deep" by one mythic bird or another, and some involve seeds'

complicated artifacts, such as camcorders or tow trucks or CT scanners, is if
being sown and tended. Human imagination has only a few resources to
draw anything more obvious. But even in simple cases, a problem can be
seen to upon when faced with such a mind-boggling question. One early
creation loom in the background:

myth speaks of a "self-existent Lord" who, "with a thought, created the
waters, and deposited in them a seed which became a golden egg, in which
egg he himself is born as Brahma, the progenitor of the worlds" (Muir
1972,

"Why are you sawing that board?"

vol. IV, p. 26).

"To make a door."

And what's the point of all this egg-laying or seed-sowing or world-

"And what is the door for?"

"To secure my house."

building? Or, for that matter, what's the point of the Big Bang? Today's

"And why do you want a secure house?"

cosmologists, like many of their predecessors throughout history, tell a

"So I can sleep nights."

diverting story, but prefer to sidestep the "why" question of teleology. Does

"And why do you want to sleep nights?" "Go run the universe exist for any
reason? Do reasons play any intelligible role in along and stop asking such
silly questions."

explanations of the cosmos? Could something exist for a reason without its
being somebody's reason? Or are reasons—Aristotle's type (4) causes—
only This exchange reveals one of the troubles with teleology: where does it
all appropriate in explanations of the works and deeds of people or other
rational stop? What final final cause can be cited to bring this hierarchy of
reasons to a agents? If God is not a person, a rational agent, an Intelligent
Artificer, what close? Aristotle had an answer: God, the Prime Mover, the
for-which to end possible sense could the biggest "why" question make?
And if the biggest all for-whiches. The idea, which is taken up by the
Christian, Jewish, and

"why" question doesn't make any sense, how could any smaller, more
Islamic traditions, is that all our purposes are ultimately God's purposes.
The parochial, "why" questions make sense?

idea is certainly natural and attractive. If we look at a pocket watch and One
of Darwin's most fundamental contributions is showing us a new way
wonder why it has a clear glass crystal on its face, the answer obviously
harks to make sense of "why" questions. Like it or not, Darwin's idea offers
one back to the needs and desires of the users of watches, who want to tell
time, way—a clear, cogent, astonishingly versatile way—of dissolving
these old by looking at the hands through the transparent, protective glass,
and so conundrums. It takes some getting used to, and is often misapplied,
even by forth. If it weren't for these facts about us, for whom the watch was
created, its staunchest friends. Gradually exposing and clarifying this way
of thinking there would be no explanation of the "why" of its crystal. If the
universe was is a central project of the present book. Darwinian thinking
must be carefully created by God, for God's purposes, then all the purposes
we can find in it distinguished from some oversimplified and all-too-
popular impostors, and must ultimately be due to God's purposes. But what
are God's purposes? That this will take us into some technicalities, but it is
worth it. The prize is, for is something of a mystery.

the first time, a stable system of explanation that does not go round and
round One way of deflecting discomfort about that mystery is to switch the
topic in circles or spiral off in an infinite regress of mysteries. Some people
would slightly. Instead of responding to the "why" question with a

"because"-type much prefer the infinite regress of mysteries, apparently, but
in this day and answer (the sort of answer it seems to demand), people often
substitute a age the cost is prohibitive: you have to get yourself deceived.
You can either

"how" question for the "why" question, and attempt to answer it by telling a
deceive yourself or let others do the dirty work, but there is no intellectually
story about how it came to be that God created us and the rest of the
universe, defensible way of rebuilding the mighty barriers to
comprehension that without dwelling overmuch on just why God might
want to have done that.

Darwin smashed.

The "how" question does not get separate billing on Aristotle's list, but it
was The first step to appreciating this aspect of Darwin's contribution is to
see a popular question and answer long before Aristotle undertook his
analysis.

how the world looked before he inverted it. By looking through the eyes of
The answers to the biggest "how" questions are cosmogonies, stories about
two of his countrymen, John Locke and David Hume, we can get a clear
how the cosmos, the whole universe and all its denizens, came into
existence.

vision of an alternative world-view—still very much with us in many quar-
The book of Genesis is

ters—that Darwin rendered obsolete.

26 TELL ME WHY

Locke's "Proof of the Primacy of Mind 27

3. LOCKE'S "PROOF" OF THE PRIMACY OF MIND

Let us suppose any parcel of Matter eternal, great or small, we shall find it,
in itself, able to produce nothing___ Matter then, by its own strength, John

Locke invented common sense, and only Englishmen have had it cannot
produce in itself so much as Motion: the Motion it has, must also be ever
since!

from Eternity, or else be produced, and added to Matter by some other

—BERTRAND RL'SSEU.2

Being more powerful than Matter __ But let us suppose Motion eternal too:
yet Matter, incogitative Matter and Motion, whatever changes it might John
Locke, a contemporary of "the incomparable Mr. Newton," was one
produce of Figure and Bulk, could never produce Thought: Knowledge of
the founding fathers of British Empiricism, and, as befits an Empiricist, he
will still be as far beyond the power of Motion and Matter to produce, as
was not much given to deductive arguments of the rationalist sort, but one
of Matter is beyond the power of nothing or nonentity to produce. And I his
uncharacteristic forays into "proof deserves to be quoted in full, since it
appeal to everyone's own thoughts, whether he cannot as easily conceive
perfectly illustrates the blockade to imagination that was in place before the
Matter produced by nothing, as Thought produced by pure Matter, when
Darwinian Revolution. The argument may seem strange and stilted to
before there was no such thing as Thought, or an intelligent Being exist-
modern minds, but bear with it—consider it a sign of how far we have come
ing. ...

since then. Locke himself thought that he was just reminding people of
something obvious! In this passage from his Essay Concerning Human It is
interesting to note that Locke decides he may safely "appeal to
Understanding (1690, IV, x, 10), Locke wanted to prove something that he
everyone's own thoughts" to secure this "conclusion." He was sure that his
thought all people knew in their hearts in any case: that "in the beginning"

"common sense" was truly common sense. Don't we see how obvious it is
there was Mind. He began by asking himself what, if anything, was eternal:
that whereas matter and motion could produce changes of "Figure and
Bulk,"

they could never produce "Thought"? Wouldn't this rule out the prospect of
If, then, there must be something eternal, let us see what sort of Being it
robots—or at least robots that would claim to have genuine Thoughts
among must be. And to that it is very obvious to Reason, that it must
necessarily the motions in their material heads? Certainly in Locke's day—
which was be a cogitative Being. For it is as impossible to conceive that
ever bare also Descartes's day—the very idea of Artificial Intelligence was
so close to incogitative Matter should produce a thinking intelligent Being,
as that unthinkable that Locke could confidently expect unanimous
endorsement of nothing should of itself produce Matter....

this appeal to his audience, an appeal that would risk hoots of derision
today.3 And as we shall see, the field of Artificial Intelligence is a quite
Locke begins his proof by alluding to one of philosophy's most ancient
direct descendant of Darwin's idea. Its birth, which was all but prophesied
by and oft-used maxims, Ex nihilo nihil fit. nothing can come from nothing.

Darwin himself, was attended by one of the first truly impressive Since this
is to be a deductive argument, he must set his sights high: it is not
demonstrations of the formal power of natural selection (Art Samuel's just
unlikely or implausible or hard to fathom but impossible to conceive that
legendary checkers-playing program, which will be described in some
detail

"bare incogitative Matter should produce a thinking intelligent Being." The
later). And both evolution and AI inspire the same loathing in many people
argument proceeds by a series of mounting steps-.

who should know better, as we shall see in later chapters. But back to
Locke's conclusion:

So if we will suppose nothing first, or eternal: Matter can never begin to be:
If we suppose bare Matter, without Motion, eternal: Motion can never 2.
Gilbert Ryle recounted this typical bit of Russellian hyperbole to me. In
spite of Ryle's own distinguished career as Waynflete Professor of
Philosophy at Oxford, he and Russell begin to be: If we suppose only
Matter and Motion first, or eternal: Thought had seldom met, he told me, in
large measure because Russell steered clear of academic can never begin to

be. For it is impossible to conceive that Matter either philosophy after the
Second World War. Once, however, Ryle found himself sharing a with or
without Motion could have originally in and from itself Sense, compartment
with Russell on a tedious train journey, and, trying desperately to make
conversation with his world-famous fellow traveler, Ryle asked him why he
thought Locke, who was neither as original nor as good a writer as
Berkeley, Hume, or Reid, had been so much more influential than they in
the English-speaking philosophical world.

3. Descartes's inability to think of Thought as Matter in Motion is discussed
at length in This had been his reply, and the beginning of the only good
conversation, Ryle said, that my book Consciousness Explained (1991a).
John Haugeland's aptly titled book, Artificial he ever had with Russell.

Intelligence: The Very Idea ( 1985 ), is a fine introduction to the
philosophical paths that make this idea thinkable after all.

28 TELL ME WHY

Hume's Close Encounter 29

Such an argument can be seen as an attempt at an alternate route to Locke's
Perception, and Knowledge, as is evident from hence, that then Sense,
Perception, and Knowledge must be a property eternally inseparable from
conclusion, a route that will take us through somewhat more empirical
detail Matter and every particle of it.

instead of relying so bluntly and directly on what is deemed inconceivable.

The actual features of the observed designs may be analyzed, for instance,
to So, if Locke is right, Mind must come first—or at least tied for first. It
secure the grounds for our appreciation of the wisdom of the Designer, and
could not come into existence at some later date, as an effect of some our
conviction that mere chance could not be responsible for these marvels.

confluence of more modest, mindless phenomena. This purports to be an In
Hume's Dialogues, three fictional characters pursue the debate with entirely
secular, logical—one might almost say mathematical—vindication

consummate wit and vigor. Cleanthes defends the Argument from Design,
of a central aspect of Judeo-Christian ( and also Islamic ) cosmogony: in the
and gives it one of its most eloquent expressions.4 Here is his opening
beginning was something with Mind—"a cogitative Being," as Locke says.

statement of it:

The traditional idea that God is a rational, thinking agent, a Designer and
Builder of the world, is here given the highest stamp of scientific approval:
Look round the world. Contemplate the whole and every part of it: You like
a mathematical theorem, its denial is supposedly impossible to conceive.

will find it to be nothing but one great machine, subdivided into an infinite
number of lesser machines, which again admit of subdivisions to a degree
And so it seemed to many brilliant and skeptical thinkers before Darwin.

beyond what human senses and faculties can trace and explain. All these
Almost a hundred years after Locke, another great British Empiricist, David
various machines, and even their most minute parts, are adjusted to each
Hume, confronted the issue again, in one of the masterpieces of Western
other with an accuracy which ravishes into admiration all men who have
philosophy, his Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion (1779).

ever contemplated them. The curious adapting of means to ends, throughout
all nature, resembles, exactly, though it much exceeds, the productions of
human contrivance—of human design, thought, wisdom, and 4. HUME'S
CLOSE ENCOUNTER

intelligence. Since therefore the effects resemble each other, we are led to
infer, by all the rules of analogy, that the causes also resemble, and that the
Natural religion, in Hume's day, meant a religion that was supported by the
Author of Nature is somewhat similar to the mind of man, though pos-
natural sciences, as opposed to a "revealed" religion, which would depend
on sessed of much larger faculties, proportioned to the grandeur of the work
revelation—on mystical experience or some other uncheckable source of
which he has executed. By this argument a posteriori, and by this argu-
conviction. If your only grounds for your religious belief is "God told me so

ment alone, do we prove at once the existence of a Deity and his similarity
to human mind and intelligence. [Pt. II]

in a dream," your religion is not natural religion. The distinction would not
have made much sense before the dawn of modern science in the
seventeenth century, when science created a new, and competitive, standard
of evidence Philo, a skeptical challenger to Cleanthes, elaborates the
argument, setting for all belief. It opened up the question:

it up for demolition. Anticipating Paley's famous example, Philo notes:

"Throw several pieces of steel together, without shape or form; they will
Can you give us any scientific grounds for your religious beliefs?

never arrange themselves so as to compose a watch."5 He goes on: "Stone,
and mortar, and wood, without an architect, never erect a house. But the
Many religious thinkers, appreciating that the prestige of scientific thought
was—other things being equal—a worthy aspiration, took up the challenge.
It is hard to see why anybody would want to shun scientific confirmation of
one's creed, if it were there to be had. The overwhelming favorite among 4.
William Paley carried the Argument from Design into much greater
biological detail in his purportedly scientific arguments for religious
conclusions, then and now, was 1803 book, Natural Theology, adding many
ingenious flourishes. Paley's influential version was the actual inspiration
and target of Darwin's rebuttal, but Hume's Cleanthes one version or
another of the Argument from Design: among the effects we catches all of
the argument's logical and rhetorical force.

can objectively observe in the world, there are many that are not (cannot be,
for various reasons ) mere accidents; they must have been designed to be as
5. Gjertsen points out that two millennia earlier, Cicero used the same
example for the same purpose: "When you see a sundial or a water-clock,
you see that it tells the time by they are, and there cannot be design without
a Designer; therefore, a design and not by chance. How then can you
imagine that the universe as a whole is Designer, God, must exist (or have
existed), as the source of all these devoid of purpose and intelligence, when
it embraces everything, including these arti-wonderful effects.

facts themselves and their artificers?" (Gjertsen 1989, p. 199).

Hume's Close Encounter 31

30 TELL ME WHY

been botched and bungled, throughout an eternity, ere this system was ideas
in a human mind, we see, by an unknown, inexplicable economy, struck
out: Much labour lost: Many fruitless trials made: And a slow, arrange
themselves so as to form the plan of a watch or house. Experience, but
continued improvement carried on during infinite ages of world-therefore,
proves, that there is an original principle of order in mind, not in making.
(Pt. V.]

matter" (Pt. II).

Note that the Argument from Design depends on an inductive inference:
When Philo presents this fanciful alternative, with its breathtaking anticipa-
where there's smoke, there's fire; and where there's design, there's mind. But
tions of Darwin's insight, he doesn't take it seriously except as a debating
foil this is a dubious inference, Philo observes: human intelligence is to
Cleanthes' vision of an all-wise Artificer. Hume uses it only to make a point
about what he saw as the limitations on our knowledge: "In such no more
than one of the springs and principles of the universe, as well subjects, who
can determine, where the truth; nay, who can conjecture where as heat or
cold, attraction or repulsion, and a hundred others, which fall the
probability, lies; amidst a great number of hypotheses which may be under
daily observation__ But can a conclusion, with any propriety, be proposed,
and a still greater number which may be imagined" (Pt. V).

transferred from parts to the whole?... From observing the growth of a
Imagination runs riot, and, exploiting that fecundity, Philo ties Cleanthes up
hair, can we learn any thing concerning the generation of a man?...

What peculiar privilege has this little agitation of the brain which we in
knots, devising weird and comical variations on Cleanthes' own hy-call
thought, that we must thus make it the model of the whole potheses, defying
Cleanthes to show why his own version should be pre-universe?...

Admirable conclusion! Stone, wood, brick, iron, brass have ferred. "Why
may not several Deities combine in contriving and framing a not, at this
time, in this minute globe of earth, an order or arrangement world?... And
why not become a perfect anthropomorphite? Why not assert without
human art and contrivance: Therefore the universe could not the Deity or
Deities to be corporeal, and to have eyes, a nose, mouth, ears, originally
attain its order and arrangement, without something similar to etc.?" (Pt. V).
At one point, Philo anticipates the Gaia hypothesis: the human art. [Pt. II.]

universe

Besides, Philo observes, if we put mind as the first cause, with its
"unknown, bears a great resemblance to an animal or organized body, and
seems inexplicable economy," this only postpones the problem: actuated
with a like principle of life and motion. A continual circulation of

We are still obliged to mount higher, in order to find the cause of this matter
in it produces no disorder ___The world, therefore, I infer, is an cause,
which you had assigned as satisfactory and conclusive ___ How animal,
and the Deity is the SOUL of the world, actuating it and actuated therefore
shall we satisfy ourselves concerning the cause of that Being, by it. [Pt. VI.]

whom you suppose the Author of nature, or, according to your system of
anthropomorphism, the ideal world, into which you trace the material?

Or perhaps isn't the world really more like a vegetable than an animal?

Have we not the same reason to trace that ideal world into another ideal
world, or new intelligent principle? But if we stop, and go no farther; In like
manner as a tree sheds its seed into the neighboring fields, and why go so
far? Why not stop at the material world? How can we satisfy produces other
trees; so the great vegetable, the world, or this planetary ourselves without
going on in infinitum? And after all, what satisfaction system, produces
within itself certain seeds, which, being scattered into is there in that
infinite progression? [Pt. IV.)

the surrounding chaos, vegetate into new worlds. A comet, for instance, is
the seed of a world.... [Pt. VII.]

Cleanthes has no satisfactory responses to these rhetorical questions, and
there is worse to come. Cleanthes insists that God's mind is like the human
—

One more wild possibility for good measure:

and agrees when Philo adds "the liker the better." But, then, Philo presses
on, is God's mind perfect, "free from every error, mistake, or incoherence in
his undertakings" (Pt. V)? There is a rival hypothesis to rule out: The
Brahmins assert, that the world arose from an infinite spider, who spun this
whole complicated mass from his bowels, and annihilates afterwards the
whole or any part of it, by absorbing it again, and And what surprise must
we entertain, when we find him a stupid resolving it into his own essence.
Here is a species of cosmogony, mechanic, who imitated others, and copied
an art, which, through a long which appears to us ridiculous; because a
spider is a little contemptible succession of ages, after multiplied trials,
mistakes, corrections, animal, whose operation we are never likely to take
for a model of the deliberations, and controversies, had been gradually
improving? Many whole universe. But still here is

worlds might have

32 TELL ME WHY

Hume's Close Encounter 33

a new species of analogy, even in our globe. And were there a planet serve a
constancy in the forms, its situation must, of necessity, have all the wholly
inhabited by spiders (which is very possible), this inference would same
appearance of art and contrivance which we observe at present __

there appear as natural and irrefragable as that which in our planet ascribes
A defect in any of these particulars destroys the form; and the matter, of the
origin of all things to design and intelligence, as explained by Clean-which
it is composed, is again set loose, and is thrown into irregular thes. Why an
orderly system may not be spun from the belly as well as from motions and
fermentations, till it unite itself to some other regular form __

the brain, it will be difficult for him to give a satisfactory reason. [Pt. VII.]

Suppose ... that matter were thrown into any position, by a blind, unguided
force; it is evident that this first position must in all probability be the most
confused and most disorderly imaginable, without any resem-Cleanthes
resists these onslaughts gamely, but Philo shows fatal flaws in blance to
those works of human contrivance, which, along with a symme-every
version of the argument that Cleanthes can devise. At the very end of try of
parts, discover an adjustment of means to ends and a tendency to the
Dialogues, however, Philo surprises us by agreeing with Cleanthes: self-
preservation __ Suppose, that the actuating force, whatever it be, still
continues in matter __ Thus the universe goes on for many ages in a

... die legitimate conclusion is that... if we are not contented with calling
continued succession of chaos and disorder. But is it not possible that it the
first and supreme cause a God or Deity, but desire to vary the expres-may
settle at last... ? May we not hope for such a position, or rather be sion, what
can we call him but Mind or Thought to which he is jusly assured of it, from
the eternal revolutions of unguided matter, and may not supposed to bear a
considerable resemblance? [Pt. XII.]

this account for all the appearing wisdom and contrivance which is in the
universe?

Philo is surely Hume's mouthpiece in the Dialogues. Why did Hume cave
Hmm, it seems that something like this might work... but Hume couldn't in?
Out of fear of reprisal from the establishment? No. Hume knew he had
quite take Philo's daring foray seriously. His final verdict: "A total suspense
shown that the Argument from Design was an irreparably flawed bridge be-
of judgment is here our only reasonable resource" (Pt. VIII). A few years
tween science and religion, and he arranged to have his Dialogues
published before him, Denis Diderot had also written some speculations
that tantaliz-after his death in 1776 precisely in order to save himself from
persecution.

ingly foreshadowed Darwin: "I can maintain to you ... that monsters anni-
He caved in because he just couldn't imagine any other explanation of the
hilated one another in succession; that all the defective combinations of

origin of the manifest design in nature. Hume could not see how the
"curious matter have disappeared, and that there have only survived those in
which the adapting of means to ends, throughout all nature" could be due to
chance—

organization did not involve any important contradiction, and which could
and if not chance, what?

subsist by themselves and perpetuate themselves" (Diderot 1749). Cute
ideas What could possibly account for this high-quality design if not an
intel-about evolution had been floating around for millennia, but, like most
ligent God? Philo is one of the most ingenious and resourceful competitors
in philosophical ideas, although they did seem to offer a solution of sorts to
the any philosophical debate, real or imaginary, and he makes some
wonderful problem at hand, they didn't promise to go any farther, to open
up new stabs in the dark, hunting for an alternative. In Part VIII, he dreams
up some investigations or generate surprising predictions that could be
tested, or speculations that come tantalizingly close to scooping Darwin
(and some explain any facts they weren't expressly designed to explain. The
evolution more recent Darwinian elaborations) by nearly a century.

revolution had to wait until Charles Darwin saw how to weave an
evolutionary hypothesis into an explanatory fabric composed of literally
Instead of supposing matter infinite, as Epicurus did, let us suppose it finite.

thousands of hard-won and often surprising facts about nature. Darwin nei-
A finite number of particles is only susceptible of finite transpositions: And
ther invented the wonderful idea out of whole cloth all by himself, nor it
must happen, in an eternal duration, that every possible order or position
understood it in its entirety even when he had formulated it. But he did such
must be tried an infinite number of times __ Is there a system, an order, an a
monumental job of clarifying the idea, and tying it down so it would never
economy of things, by which matter can preserve that perpetual agitation,
again float away, that he deserves the credit if anyone does. The next
chapter which seems essential to it, and yet maintain a constancy in the
forms, reviews his basic accomplishment.

which it produces? There certainly is such an economy: For this is actually
the case with the present world. The continual motion of matter, therefore,
in less than infinite transpositions, must produce this economy or order; and
by its very nature, that order, when once established, supports CHAPTER 1:
Before Darwin, a "Mind-first" view of the universe reigned itself, for many
ages, if not to eternity. But wherever matter is so poised, unchallenged; an
intelligent God was seen as the ultimate source of all arranged, and adjusted
as to continue in perpetual motion, and yet pre-Design, the ultimate answer
to any chain of "Why?" questions. Even David 34 TELL ME WHY

Hume, who deftly exposed the insoluble problems with this vision, and had
glimpses of the Darwinian alternative, could not see how to take it
seriously.

CHAPTER 2: Darwin, setting out to answer a relatively modest question
about CHAPTER TWO

die origin of species, described a process he called natural selection, a
mindless, purposeless, mechanical process. This turns out to be the seed of
an answer to a much grander question: how does Design come into An Idea
Is Born

existence?

1. WHAT IS SO SPECIAL ABOUT SPECIES?

Charles Darwin did not set out to concoct an antidote to John Locke's
conceptual paralysis, or to pin down the grand cosmological alternative that
had barely eluded Hume. Once his great idea occurred to him, he saw that it
would indeed have these truly revolutionary consequences, but at the outset
he was not trying to explain the meaning of life, or even its origin. His aim
was slightly more modest: he wanted to explain the origin of species.

In his day, naturalists had amassed mountains of tantalizing facts about
living things and had succeeded in systematizing these facts along several
dimensions. Two great sources of wonder emerged from this work (Mayr
1982). First, there were all the discoveries about the adaptations of
organisms that had enthralled Hume's Cleanthes: "All these various

machines, and even their most minute parts, are adjusted to each other with
an accuracy which ravishes into admiration all men who have ever
contemplated them"

(Pt. II). Second, there was the prolific diversity of living things—literally
millions of different kinds of plants and animals. Why were there so many?

This diversity of design of organisms was as striking, in some regards, as
their excellence of design, and even more striking were the patterns
discernible within that diversity. Thousands of gradations and variations
between organisms could be observed, but there were also huge gaps
between them. There were birds and mammals that swam like fish, but none
with gills; there were dogs of many sizes and shapes, but no dogcats or
dogcows or feathered dogs. The patterns called out for classification, and by
Darwin's time the work of the great taxonomists (who began by adopting
and correcting Aristotle's ancient classifications) had created a detailed
hierarchy of two kingdoms (plants and animals), divided into phyla, which
divided into classes, which divided into orders, which divided into families,
which divided into genera (the plural of "genus"), which divided into
species.

36 AN IDEA IS BORN

What Is So Special About Species? 37

Species could also be subdivided, of course, into subspecies or varieties—

abstracting away from the grubby accidental properties of things to find
their cocker spaniels and basset hounds are different varieties of a single
species-, secret mathematical essences. It makes no difference what color or
shape a dogs, or Canis familiaris.

thing is when it comes to the thing's obeying Newton's inverse-square law
of How many different kinds of organisms were there? Since no two organ-
gravitational attraction. All that matters is its mass. Similarly, alchemy had
isms are exactly alike—not even identical twins—there were as many dif-
been succeeded by chemistry once chemists settled on their fundamental
ferent kinds of organisms as there were organisms, but it seemed obvious

that creed: There were a finite number of basic, immutable elements, such
as the differences could be graded, sorted into minor and major, or
accidental carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, and iron. These might be mixed and
united in and essential. Thus Aristotle had taught, and this was one bit of
philosophy endless combinations over time, but the fundamental building
blocks were that had permeated the thinking of just about everybody, from
cardinals to identifiable by their changeless essential properties.

chemists to costermongers. All things—not just living things— had two
kinds The doctrine of essences looked like a powerful organizer of the
world's of properties: essential properties, without which they wouldn't be
the phenomena in many areas, but was it true of every classification scheme
one particular kind of thing they were, and accidental properties, which
were free could devise? Were there essential differences between hills and
mountains, to vary within the kind. A lump of gold could change shape ad
lib and still be snow and sleet, mansions and palaces, violins and violas?
John Locke and others had developed elaborate doctrines distinguishing
real essences from gold; what made it gold were its essential properties, not
its accidents. With merely nominal essences; the latter were simply parasitic
on the names or each kind went an essence. Essences were definitive, and
as such they were words we chose to use. You could set up any
classification scheme you timeless, unchanging, and all-or-nothing. A thing
couldn't be rather silver or wanted; for instance, a kennel club could vote
on a defining list of necessary quasi-gold or a semi'-mammal.

conditions for a dog to be a genuine Ourkind Spaniel, but this would be a
Aristotle had developed his theory of essences as an improvement on mere
nominal essence, not a real essence. Real essences were discoverable Plato's
theory of Ideas, according to which every earthly thing is a sort of by
scientific investigation into the internal nature of things, where essence
imperfect copy or reflection of an ideal exemplar or Form that existed and
accident could be distinguished according to principles. It was hard to
timelessly in the Platonic realm of Ideas, reigned over by God. This
Platonic say just what the principled principles were, but with chemistry
and physics heaven of abstractions was not visible, of course, but was
accessible to Mind so handsomely falling into line, it seemed to stand to
reason that there had to through deductive thought. What geometers thought

about, and proved be denning marks of the real essences of living things as
well.

theorems about, for instance, were the Forms of the circle and the triangle.

From the perspective of this deliciously crisp and systematic vision of the
Since there were also Forms for the eagle and the elephant, a deductive
hierarchy of living things, there were a considerable number of awkward
and science of nature was also worth a try. But just as no earthly circle, no
matter puzzling facts. These apparent exceptions were almost as troubling
to how carefully drawn with a compass, or thrown on a potter's wheel,
could naturalists as the discovery of a triangle whose angles didn't quite add
up to actually be one of the perfect circles of Euclidean geometry, so no
actual 180 degrees would have been to a geometer. Although many of the
taxo-eagle could perfectly manifest the essence of eaglehood, though every
eagle nomic boundaries were sharp and apparently exceptionless, there
were all strove to do so. Everything that existed had a divine specification,
which manner of hard-to-classify intermediate creatures, who seemed to
have por-captured its essence. The taxonomy of living things Darwin
inherited was tions of more than one essence. There were also the curious
higher-order thus itself a direct descendant, via Aristotle, of Plato's essen-
tialism. In fact, patterns of shared and unshared features: why should it be
backbones rather the word "species" was at one point a standard translation
of Plato's Greek than feathers that birds and fish shared, and why shouldn't
creature with eyes word for Form or Idea, eidos.

or carnivore be as important a classifier as warmblooded creature?
Although We post-Darwinians are so used to thinking in historical terms
about the the broad outlines and most of die specific rulings of taxonomy
were development of life forms that it takes a special effort to remind
ourselves undisputed (and remain so today, of course), there were heated
controversies that in Darwin's day species of organisms were deemed to be
as timeless as about the problem cases. Were all these lizards members of
die same species, the perfect triangles and circles of Euclidean geometry.
Their individual or of several different species? Which principle of
classification should members came and went, but the species itself
remained unchanged and

"count"? In Plato's famous image, which system "carved nature at the
unchangeable. This was part of a philosophical heritage, but it was not an
idle joints"?

or ill-motivated dogma. The triumphs of modern science, from Copernicus
Before Darwin, these controversies were fundamentally ill-formed, and and
Kepler, Descartes and Newton, had all involved the application of precise
could not yield a stable, well-motivated answer because there was no back-
mathematics to the material world, and this apparently requires 38 AN
IDEA IS BORN

Natural Selection— an Awful Stretcher 39

ground theory of why one classification scheme would count as getting the
in, so in the conclusion of his book he went so far as to beseech the support
joints right—the way things really were. Today bookstores face the same
sort of his younger readers: "Whoever is led to believe that species are
mutable of ill-formed problem: how should the following categories be
cross-will do good service by conscientiously expressing his conviction; for
only organized: best-sellers, science fiction, horror, garden, biography,
novels, thus can the load of prejudice by which this subject is overwhelmed
be collections, sports, illustrated books? If horror is a genus of fiction, then
true removed" (Origin, p. 482).

tales of horror present a problem. Must all novels be fiction? Then the Even
today Darwin's overthrow of essentialism has not been completely
bookseller cannot honor Truman Capote's own description of In Cold Blood
assimilated. For instance, there is much discussion in philosophy these days
(1965) as a nonfiction novel, but the book doesn't sit comfortably amid
either about "natural kinds," an ancient term the philosopher W. V. O. Quine
the biographies or the history books. In what section of the bookstore
should (1969) quite cautiously resurrected for limited use in distinguishing
good the book you are reading be shelved? Obviously there is no one Right
Way to scientific categories from bad ones. But in the writings of other
philosophers, categorize books—nominal essences are all we will ever find
in this domain.

"natural kind" is often sheep's clothing for the wolf of real essence. The But
many naturalists were convinced on general principles that there were
essentialist urge is still with us, and not always for bad reasons. Science
does real essences to be found among the categories of their Natural System
of aspire to carve nature at its joints, and it often seems that we need
essences, living things. As Darwin put it, "They believe that it reveals the
plan of the or something like essences, to do the job. On this one point, the
two great Creator; but unless it be specified whether order in time or space,
or what kingdoms of philosophical thought, the Platonic and the
Aristotelian, agree.

else is meant by the plan of the Creator, it seems to me that nothing is thus
But the Darwinian mutation, which at first seemed to be just a new way of
added to our knowledge" (Origin, p. 413).

thinking about kinds in biology, can spread to other phenomena and other
Problems in science are sometimes made easier by adding complications.

disciplines, as we shall see. There are persistent problems both inside and
The development of the science of geology and the discovery of fossils of
outside biology that readily dissolve once we adopt the Darwinian
manifestly extinct species gave the taxonomists further curiosities to con-
perspective on what makes a thing the sort of thing it is, but the tradition-
found them, but these curiosities were also the very pieces of the puzzle that
bound resistance to this idea persists.

enabled Darwin, working alongside hundreds of other scientists, to discover
the key to its solution: species were not eternal and immutable; they had
evolved over time. Unlike carbon atoms, which, for all one knew, had been
around forever in exactly the form they now exhibited, species had births in
2. NATURAL SELECTION—AN AWFUL STRETCHER

time, could change over time, and could give birth to new species in turn.

This idea itself was not new; many versions of it had been seriously It is an
awful stretcher to believe that a peacock's tail was thus formed; discussed,
going back to the ancient Greeks. But there was a powerful but, believing it,

I believe in the same principle somewhat modified Platonic bias against it:
essences were unchanging, and a thing couldn't applied to man.

change its essence, and new essences couldn't be born—except of course by

—CHARLES DARWIN, letter quoted in Desmond and

God's command in episodes of Special Creation. Reptiles could no more
turn Moore 1991, p. 553

into birds than copper could turn into gold.

It isn't easy today to sympathize with this conviction, but the effort can be
Darwin's project in Origin can be divided in two: to prove that modern
helped along by a fantasy: consider what your attitude would be towards a
species were revised descendants of earlier species—species had evolved—

theory that purported to show how the number 7 had once been an even and
to show how this process of "descent with modification" had occurred. If
number, long, long ago, and had gradually acquired its oddness through an
Darwin hadn't had a vision of a mechanism, natural selection, by which this
arrangement whereby it exchanged some properties with the ancestors of
the well-nigh-inconceivable historical transformation could have been ac-
number 10 (which had once been a prime number). Utter nonsense, of
course.

complished, he would probably not have had the motivation to assemble all
Inconceivable. Darwin knew that a parallel attitude was deeply ingrained
the circumstantial evidence that it had actually occurred. Today we can
among his contemporaries, and that he would have to labor mightily to
readily enough imagine proving Darwin's first case—the brute historic fact
overcome it. Indeed, he more or less conceded that the elder authorities of
his of descent with modification—quite independently of any consideration
of day would tend to be as immutable as the species they believed Natural
selection or indeed any other mechanism for bringing these brute events
about, but for Darwin the idea of the mechanism was both the 40 AN IDEA
IS BORN

Natural Selection— an A wful Stretcher 41

hunting license he needed, and an unwavering guide to the right questions
to of years, we can be sure that only a fraction of the elephants born in any
ask.1

period have progeny of their own.

The idea of natural selection was not itself a miraculously novel creation of
So the normal state of affairs for any sort of reproducers is one in which
Darwin's but, rather, the offspring of earlier ideas that had been vigorously
more offspring are produced in any one generation than will in turn repro-
discussed for years and even generations (for an excellent account of this
duce in the next. In other words, it is almost always crunch time.3 At such a
intellectual history, see R. Richards 1987). Chief among these parent ideas
crunch, which prospective parents will "win"? Will it be a fair lottery, in
was an insight Darwin gained from reflection on the 1798 Essay on the
which every organism has an equal chance of being among the few that
Principle of Population by Thomas Malthus, which argued that population
reproduce? In a political context, this is where invidious themes enter, about
explosion and famine were inevitable, given the excess fertility of human
power, privilege, injustice, treachery, class warfare, and the like, but we can
beings, unless drastic measures were taken. The grim Malthusian vision of
elevate the observation from its political birthplace and consider in the ab-
the social and political forces that could act to check human overpopulation
stract, as Darwin did, what would—must—happen in nature. Darwin added
may have strongly flavored Darwin's thinking (and undoubtedly has
flavored two further logical points to the insight he had found in Malthus:
the first was the shallow political attacks of many an anti-Darwinian ), but
the idea Darwin that at crunch time, if there was significant variation among
the contestants, needed from Malthus is purely logical. It has nothing at all
to do with then any advantages enjoyed by any of the contestants would
inevitably bias political ideology, and can be expressed in very abstract and
general terms.

the sample that reproduced. However tiny the advantage in question, if it
was Suppose a world in which organisms have many offspring. Since the
off-actually an advantage (and thus not absolutely invisible to nature), it

would spring themselves will have many offspring, the population will
grow and tip the scales in favor of those who held it. The second was that if
there was a grow ("geometrically" ) until inevitably, sooner or later—
surprisingly soon,

"strong principle of inheritance"—if offspring tended to be more like their
in fact—it must grow too large for the available resources (of food, of
space, parents than like their parents' contemporaries—the biases created by
ad-of whatever the organisms need to survive long enough to reproduce). At
that vantages, however small, would become amplified over time, creating
trends point, whenever it happens, not all organisms will have offspring.
Many will that could grow indefinitely. "More individuals are born than can
possibly die childless. It was Malthus who pointed out the mathematical
inevitability survive. A grain in the balance will determine which individual
shall live and of such a crunch in any population of long-term reproducers
— people, which shall die,—which variety or species shall increase in
number, and animals, plants (or, for that matter, Martian clone-machines,
not that such which shall decrease, or finally become extinct" {Origin, p.
467).

fanciful possibilities were discussed by Malthus). Those populations that
What Darwin saw was that if one merely supposed these few general
reproduce at less than the replacement rate are headed for extinction unless
conditions to apply at crunch time—conditions for which he could supply
they reverse the trend. Populations that maintain a stable population over
long ample evidence—the resulting process would necessarily lead in the
direc-periods of time will do so by settling on a rate of overproduction of
offspring tion of individuals in future generations who tended to be better
equipped to that is balanced by the vicissitudes encountered. This is
obvious, perhaps, for deal with the problems of resource limitation that had
been faced by the houseflies and other prodigious breeders, but Darwin
drove the point home individuals of their parents' generation. This
fundamental idea—Darwin's with a calculation of his own: "The elephant is
reckoned to be the slowest dangerous idea, the idea that generates so much
insight, turmoil, confusion, breeder of all known animals, and I have taken
some pains to estimate its anxiety—is thus actually quite simple. Darwin

summarizes it in two long probable minimum rate of natural increase:... at
the end of the fifth century sentences at the end of chapter 4 of Origin.

there would be alive fifteen million elephants, descended from the first
pair"

( Origin, p. 64 ).2 Since elephants have been around for millions If during
the long course of ages and under varying conditions of life, organic beings
vary at all in the several parts of their organization, and I 1. This has often
happened in science. For instance, for many years there was lots of 3. A
familiar example of Malthus' rule in action is the rapid expansion of yeast
evidence lying around in favor of the hypothesis that the continents have
drifted—that populations introduced into fresh bread dough or grape juice.
Thanks to the feast of Africa and South America were once adjacent and
broke apart—but until the mechanisms sugar and other nutrients, population
explosions ensue that last for a few hours in the of plate tectonics were
conceived, it was hard to take the hypothesis seriously.

dough, or a few weeks in the juice, but soon the yeast populations hit the
Malthusian 2. This sum as it appeared in the first edition is wrong, and
when this was pointed out, ceiling, done in by eir own voraciousness and
the accumulation of their waste Darwin revised his calculations for later
editions, but the general principle is still products—carbon dioxide (which
forms the bubbles that make the bread rise, and the unchallenged.

fizz in champagne) and alcohol being the two that we yeast-exploiters tend
to value.

42 AN IDEA IS BORN

Did Darwin Explain the Origin of Species? 43

think this cannot be disputed; if there be, owing to the high geometric
doesn't even purport to offer an explanation of the origin of the first species,
powers of increase of each species, at some age, season, or year, a severe or
of life itself; he begins in the middle, supposing many different species with
struggle for life, and this certainly cannot be disputed; then, considering
many different talents already present, and claims that starting from such a

the infinite complexity of the relations of all organic beings to each other
mid-stage point, the process he has described will inevitably hone and di-
and to their conditions of existence, causing an infinite diversity in struc-
versify the talents of the species already existing. And will that process
create ture, constitution, and habits, to be advantageous to them, I think it
would still further species? The summary is silent on that score, but the
book is not.

be a most extraordinary fact if no variation ever had occurred useful to each
being's own welfare, in the same way as so many variations have In fact,
Darwin saw his idea explaining both great sources of wonder in a occurred
useful to man. But if variations useful to any organic being do single stroke.
The generation of adaptations and the generation of diversity occur,
assuredly individuals thus characterized will have the best chance were
different aspects of a single complex phenomenon, and the unifying of
being preserved in the struggle for life; and from the strong principle of
insight, he claimed, was the principle of natural selection.

inheritance they will tend to produce offspring similarly characterized.

Natural selection would inevitably produce adaptation, as the summary
This principle of preservation, I have called, for the sake of brevity, Natural
makes clear, and under the right circumstances, he argued, accumulated
Selection. [Origin, p. 127.]

adaptation would create speciation. Darwin knew full well that explaining
variation is not explaining speciation. The animal-breeders he pumped so
vigorously for their lore knew about how to breed variety within a single
This was Darwin's great idea, not the idea of evolution, but the idea of
species, but had apparently never created a new species, and scoffed at the
evolution by natural selection, an idea he himself could never formulate
with idea that their particular different breeds might have a common
ancestor.

sufficient rigor and detail to prove, though he presented a brilliant case for
it.

"Ask, as 1 have asked, a celebrated raiser of Hereford cattle, whether his
The next two sections will concentrate on curious and crucial features of
this cattle might not have descended from longhorns, and he will laugh you
to summary statement of Darwin's.

scorn." Why? Because "though they well know that each race varies
slightly, for they win their prizes by selecting such slight differences, yet
they ignore all general arguments and refuse to sum up in their minds slight
differences 3. DID DARWIN EXPLAIN THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES?

accumulated during many successive generations" (Origin, p. 29).

The further diversification into species would occur, Darwin argued,
because if there was a variety of heritable skills or equipment in a
population Darwin did wrestle brilliantly and triumphantly with the
problem of (of a single species), these different skills or equipment would
tend to have adaptation, but he had limited success with the issue of
diversity— even different payoffs for different subgroups of the population,
and hence these though he titled his book with reference to his relative
failure: the origin subpopulations would tend to diverge, each one pursuing
its favored sort of of species.

excellence, until eventually there would be a complete parting of the ways.

—STEPHEN JAY GOULD 1992a, p. 54

Why, Darwin asked himself, would this divergence lead to separation or
clumping of the variations instead of remaining a more or less continuous
Thus die grand fact in natural history of the subordination of group fan-out
of slight differences? Simple geographical isolation was part of his under
group, which, from its familiarity, does not always sufficiently answer; when
a population got split by a major geological or climatic event, strike us, is in
my judgment fully explained.

or by haphazard emigration to an isolated range such as an island, this

—CHARLES DARWIN, Origin, p. 413

discontinuity in the environment ought to become mirrored eventually in a
discontinuity in the useful variations observable in the two populations.
And Notice that Darwin's summary does not mention speciation at all. It is
en-once discontinuity got a foothold, it would be self-reinforcing, all the
way to tirely about the adaptation of organisms, the excellence of their
design, not separation into distinct species. Another, rather different, idea of
his was that the diversity. Moreover, on the face of it, this summary takes
the diversity of in intraspecific infighting, a "winner take all" principle
would tend to species as an assumption: "the infinite [sic] complexity of the
relations of all operate:

organic beings to each other and to their conditions of existence." What
makes for this stupendous (if not actually infinite ) complexity is the
presence For it should be remembered that the competition will generally be
most at one and the same time (and competing for the same living space) of
so severe between those forms which are most nearly related to each other
many different life forms, with so many different needs and strategies.
Darwin inhabits, constitution and structure. Hence all the intermediate
forms 44 AN IDEA IS BORN

Did Darwin Explain the Origin of Species? 45

between the earlier and later states, that is between die less and more ing
that reunites the splitting groups, mixing their genes and "frustrating" the
improved state of a species, as well as the original parent-species itself, will
process of speciation. It is not that anything wants speciation to happen, of
generally tend to become extinct. [Origin, p. 121.]

course (Dawkins 1986a, p. 237), but if the irreversible divorce that marks
speciation is to happen, it must be preceded by a sort of trial separation He
formulated a variety of other ingenious and plausible speculations on period
in which interbreeding ceases for one reason or another, so that the how and
why the relentless culling of natural selection would actually create parting
groups can move further apart. The criterion of reproductive isolation
species boundaries, but they remain speculations to this day. It has taken a
is vague at the edges. Do organisms belong to different species when they
century of further work to replace Darwin's brilliant but inconclusive can't
interbreed, or when they just don't interbreed? Wolves and coyotes and

musings on the mechanisms of speciation with accounts that are to some
dogs are considered to be different species, and yet interbreeding does
occur, degree demonstrable. Controversy about the mechanisms and
principles of and—unlike mules, the offspring of horse and donkey—their
offspring are not speciation still persists, so in one sense neither Darwin nor
any subsequent in general sterile. Dachshunds and Irish wolfhounds are
deemed to be of the Darwinian has explained the origin of species. As the
geneticist Steve Jones same species, but unless their owners provide some
distinctly unnatural (1993) has remarked, had Darwin published his
masterpiece under its arrangements, they are about as reproductively
isolated as bats are from existing title today, "he would have been in trouble
with the Trades dolphins. The white-tailed deer in Maine don't in fact
interbreed with the Description Act because if there is one thing which
Origin of Species is not white-tailed deer in Massachusetts, since they don't
travel that far, but they about, it is the origin of species. Darwin knew
nothing about genetics. Now surely could if transported, and naturally they
count as of the same species.

we know a great deal, and although the way in which species begin is still a
And finally—a true-life example seemingly made to order for philoso-
mystery, it is one with the details filled in."

phers—consider the herring gulls that live in the Northern Hemisphere,
their But the fact of speciation itself is incontestable, as Darwin showed,
build-range forming a broad ring around the North Pole.

ing an irresistible case out of literally hundreds of carefully studied and
closely argued instances. That is how species originate: by "descent with As
we look at the herring gull, moving westwards from Great Britain to North
America, we see gulls that are recognizably herring gulls, although
modification" from earlier species—not by Special Creation. So in another
they are a little different from the British form. We can follow them, as
sense Darwin undeniably did explain the origin of species. Whatever the
their appearance gradually changes, as far as Siberia. At about this point in
mechanisms are that operate, they manifestly begin with the emergence of
the continuum, the gull looks more like the form that in Great Britain is
variety within a species, and end, after modifications have accumulated,

with called the lesser black-backed gull. From Siberia, across Russia, to
northern the birth of a new, descendant species. What start as "well-marked
varieties"

Europe, the gull gradually changes to look more and more like the British
turn gradually into "the doubtful category of subspecies; but we have only
to lesser black-backed gull. Finally, in Europe, the ring is complete; the two
suppose the steps in the process of modification to be more numerous or
geographically extreme forms meet, to form two perfectly good species:
greater in amount, to convert these... forms into well-defined species"

die herring and lesser black-backed gull can be both distinguished by their
(Origin, p. 120).

appearance and do not naturally interbreed. [Mark Ridley 1985, p. 5]

Notice that Darwin is careful to describe the eventual outcome as the
creation of "well-defined" species. Eventually, he is saying, the divergence

"Well-defined" species certainly do exist—it is the purpose of Darwin's
becomes so great that there is just no reason to deny that what we have are
book to explain their origin—but he discourages us from trying to find a
two different species, not merely two different varieties. But he declines to

"principled" definition of the concept of a species. Varieties, Darwin keeps
play the traditional game of declaring what the "essential" difference is:
insisting, are just "incipient species," and what normally turns two varieties
into two species is not the presence of something (a new essence for each

... it will be seen that I look at the term species, as one arbitrarily given for
group, for instance ) but the absence of something: the intermediate cases,
the sake of convenience to a set of individuals closely resembling each
which used to be there—which were necessary stepping-stones, you might
other, and that it does not essentially differ from the term variety, which is
say—but have eventually gone extinct, leaving two groups that are in fact
given to less distinct and more fluctuating forms. [Origin, p. 52.]

reproductively isolated as well as different in their characteristics.

Origin of Species presents an overwhelmingly persuasive case for Dar-One
of the standard marks of species difference, as Darwin fully recog-win's
first thesis—the historical fact of evolution as the cause of the origin nized,
is reproductive isolation—there is no interbreeding. It is interbreed-46 AN
IDEA IS BORN

Did Darwin Explain the Origin of Species? 47

of species—and a tantalizing case in favor of his second thesis—that the
another process that might achieve these effects? What else could account
fundamental mechanism responsible for "descent with modification" was
for evolution, if not the mechanism he had described?

natural selection.4 Levelheaded readers of the book simply could no longer
This challenge effectively turned Hume's predicament inside out. Hume
doubt that species had evolved over the eons, as Darwin said they had, but
caved in because he could not imagine how anything other than an
Intelligent scrupulous skepticism about the power of his proposed
mechanism of natural Artificer could be the cause of the adaptations that
anyone could observe. Or, selection was harder to overcome. Intervening
years have raised the more accurately, Hume's Philo imagined several
different alternatives, but confidence level for both theses, but not erased
the difference (Ellegard Hume had no way of taking these imaginings
seriously. Darwin described

[1958] provides a valuable account of this history). The evidence for evo-
how a Nonintelligent Artificer could produce those adaptations over vast
lution pours in, not only from geology, paleontology, biogeography, and
amounts of time, and proved that many of the intermediate stages that
would anatomy (Darwin's chief sources), but of course from molecular
biology and be needed by that proposed process had indeed occurred. Now
the challenge every other branch of the life sciences. To put it bluntly but
fairly, anyone to imagination was reversed: given all the telltale signs of the
historical today who doubts that the variety of life on this planet was
produced by a process that Darwin uncovered—all the brush-marks of the
artist, you might process of evolution is simply ignorant—inexcusably
ignorant, in a world say—could anyone imagine how any process other
than natural selection where three out of four people have learned to read

and write. Doubts about could have produced all these effects? So complete
has this reversal of the the power of Darwin's idea of natural selection to
explain this evolutionary burden of proof been that scientists often find
themselves in something like process are still intellectually respectable,
however, although the burden of the mirror image of Hume's predicament.
When they are confronted with a proof for such skepticism has become
immense, as we shall see.

prima facie powerful and undismissable objection to natural selection (we
So, although Darwin depended on his idea of the mechanism of natural will
consider the strongest cases in due course), they are driven to reason as
selection to inspire and guide his research on evolution, the end result
follows: I cannot (yet) see how to refute this objection, or overcome this
reversed the order of dependence: he showed so convincingly that species
difficulty, but since I cannot imagine how anything other than natural had to
have evolved that he could then turn around and use this fact to selection
could be the cause of the effects, I will have to assume that the support his
more radical idea, natural selection. He had described a mech-objection is
spurious; somehow natural selection must be sufficient to explain anism or
process that, according to his arguments, could have produced all the
effects.

these effects. Skeptics were presented with a challenge: Could they show
that Before anyone jumps on this and pronounces that I have just conceded
that his arguments were mistaken? Could they show how natural selection
would Darwinism is just as much an unprovable faith as natural religion, it
should be incapable of producing the effects?5 Or could they even describe
be borne in mind that there is a fundamental difference: having declared
their allegiance to natural selection, these scientists have then proceeded to
take on the burden of showing how the difficulties with their view could be
overcome, and, time and time again, they have succeeded in meeting the 4.
As is often pointed out, Darwin didn't insist that natural selection explained
everything: challenge. In the process, Darwin's fundamental idea of natural
selection has it was the "main but not exclusive means of modification"
(Origin, p. 6).

been articulated, expanded, clarified, quantified, and deepened in many 5. It
is sometimes suggested that Darwin's theory is systematically irrefutable (
and hence ways, becoming stronger every time it overcame a challenge.
With every scientifically vacuous), but Darwin was forthright about what
sort of finding it would take to refute his theory. "Though nature grants vast
periods of time for the work of natural success, the scientists' conviction
grows that they must be on the right track.

selection, she does not grant an indefinite period" (Origin, p. 102), so, if the
geological It is reasonable to believe that an idea that was ultimately false
would surely evidence mounted to show that not enough time had elapsed,
his whole theory would be have succumbed by now to such an unremitting
campaign of attacks. That is refuted. This still left a temporary loophole, for
the theory wasn't formulatable in suffi-not a conclusive proof, of course,
just a mighty persuasive consideration.

ciently rigorous detail to say just how many millions of years was the
minimal amount required, but it was a temporary loophole that made sense,
since at least some proposals One of the goals of this book is to explain why
the idea of natural selection about its size could be evaluated independently.
(Kitcher [1985a, pp. 162-65], has a appears to be a clear winner, even while
there are unresolved controversies good discussion of the further subtleties
of argument that kept Darwinian theory from about how it can handle some
phenomena.

being directly confirmed or disconfirmed.) Another famous instance: "If it
could be demonstrated diat any complex organ existed, which could not
possibly have been formed by numerous, successive, slight modifications,
my theory would absolutely break down" ( Origin, p. 189 ). Many have
risen to this challenge, but, as we shall see in chapter 11, there are good
reasons why they have not succeeded in their attempted demonstrations.

48 AN IDEA IS BORN

Natural Selection as an Algorithmic Process 49

4. NATURAL SELECTION AS AN ALGORITHMIC PROCESS

consists of two sorts of demonstrations-, the logical demonstration that a
certain sort of process would necessarily have a certain sort of outcome,
and What limit can be put to this power, acting during long ages and rigidly
the empirical demonstration that the requisite conditions for that sort of
scrutinising the whole constitution, structure, and habits of each crea-
process had in fact been met in nature. He bolsters up his logical dem-ture,
— favouring the good and rejecting the bad? I can see no limit to onstration
with thought experiments—"imaginary instances" {Origin, p.

this power, in slowly and beautifully adapting each form to the most 95)—
that show how the meeting of these conditions might actually account
complex relations of life.

for the effects he claimed to be explaining, but his whole argument extends
to book length because he presents a wealth of hard-won empirical detail to

—CHARLES DARWIN, Origin, p. 469

convince the reader that these conditions have been met over and over
again.

Stephen Jay Gould (1985) gives us a fine glimpse of the importance of this
The second point to notice in Darwin's summary is that he presents his
feature of Darwin's argument in an anecdote about Patrick Matthew, a
principle as deducible by a formal argument— if the conditions are met, a
Scottish naturalist who as a matter of curious historical fact had scooped
certain outcome is assured.6 Here is the summary again, with some key
Darwin's account of natural selection by many years—in an appendix to his
terms in boldface.

1831 book, Naval Timber and Arboriculture. In the wake of Darwin's ascent
If, during the long course of ages and under varying conditions of life, to
fame, Matthew published a letter (in Gardeners' Chronicle?) proclaiming
organic beings vary at all in the several parts of their organization, and I his
priority, which Darwin graciously conceded, excusing his ignorance by
think this cannot be disputed; if there be, owing to the high geometric

noting the obscurity of Matthew's choice of venue. Responding to Darwin's
powers of increase of each species, at some age, season, or year, a severe
published apology, Matthew wrote:

struggle for life, and this certainly cannot be disputed; then, considering the
infinite complexity of the relations of all organic beings to each other To me
the conception of this law of Nature came intuitively as a self-and to their
conditions of existence, causing an infinite diversity in struc-evident fact,
almost without an effort of concentrated thought. Mr. Darwin ture,
constitution, and habits, to be advantageous to them, I think it here seems to
have more merit in the discovery than I have had—to me it would be a most
extraordinary fact if no variation ever had occurred did not appear a
discovery. He seems to have worked it out by inductive useful to each
being's own welfare, in the same way as so many variations reason, slowly
and with due caution to have made his way synthetically have occurred
useful to man. But if variations useful to any organic from fact to fact
onwards; while with me it was by a general glance at the being do occur,
assuredly individuals thus characterized will have the scheme of Nature that
I estimated this select production of species as an a best chance of being
preserved in the struggle for life; and from the strong priori recognizable
fact—an axiom, requiring only to be pointed out to be principle of
inheritance they will tend to produce offspring similarly admitted by
unprejudiced minds of sufficient grasp. [Quoted in Gould characterized.
This principle of preservation, I have called, for the sake of 1985, pp. 345-
46.]

brevity, Natural Selection. [Origin, p. 127 (facs. ed. of 1st ed.).]

Unprejudiced minds may well resist a new idea out of sound conservatism,
The basic deductive argument is short and sweet, but Darwin himself
however. Deductive arguments are notoriously treacherous; what seems to
described Origin of Species as "one long argument." That is because it stand
to reason" can be betrayed by an overlooked detail. Darwin appreciated that
only a relentlessly detailed survey of the evidence for the historical
processes he was postulating would—or should—persuade scientists to
abandon their traditional convictions and take on his revolutionary vision,

6. The ideal of a deductive ( or "nomologico-deductive" ) science, modeled
on Newtonian even if it was in fact "deducible from first principles."

or Galilean physics, was quite standard until fairly recently in the
philosophy of science, so it is not surprising that much effort has been
devoted to devising and criticizing various axiomatizations of Darwin's
theory—since it was presumed that in such a formalization lay scientific
vindication. The idea, introduced in this section, that Darwin should be
seen, rather, as postulating that evolution is an algorithmic process, permits
us to do justice to the undeniable a priori flavor of Darwin's thinking
without forcing it into the Procrustean (and obsolete) bed of the
nomologico-deductive model. See Sober 1984a and Kitcher Gardeners'
Chronicle, April 7, I860. See Hardin 1964 for more details.

1985a.

50 AN IDEA IS BORN

Natural Selection as an Algorithmic Process 51

From the outset, there were those who viewed Darwin's novel mixture of
ing, using any symbol system you like. The power of the procedure is
detailed naturalism and abstract reasoning about processes as a dubious and
due to its logical structure, not the causal powers of the materials used
inviable hybrid. It had a tremendous air of plausibility, but so do many get-
in the instantiation, just so long as those causal powers permit the rich-
quick schemes that turn out to be empty tricks. Compare it to the prescribed
steps to be followed exactly.

following stock-market principle. Buy Low, Sell High. This is guaranteed to
(2) underlying mindlessness: Although the overall design of the proce-make
you wealthy. You cannot fail to get rich if you follow this advice. Why dure
may be brilliant, or yield brilliant results, each constituent step, doesn't it
work? It does work—for everybody who is fortunate enough to act as well
as the transition between steps, is utterly simple. How simple?

according to it, but, alas, there is no way of determining that the conditions
Simple enough for a dutiful idiot to perform—or for a straightforward are

met until it is too late to act on them. Darwin was offering a skeptical
mechanical device to perform. The standard textbook analogy notes world
what we might call a get-rich-slow scheme, a scheme for creating that
algorithms are recipes of sorts, designed to be followed by novice Design
out of Chaos without the aid of Mind.

cooks. A recipe book written for great chefs might include the phrase The
theoretical power of Darwin's abstract scheme was due to several

"Poach the fish in a suitable wine until almost done," but an algorithm
features that Darwin quite firmly identified, and appreciated better than
many for the same process might begin, "Choose a white wine that says
'dry'

of his supporters, but lacked the terminology to describe explicitly. Today
we on the label; take a corkscrew and open the bottle; pour an inch of could
capture these features under a single term. Darwin had discovered the wine
in the bottom of a pan; turn the burner under the pan on high; ...

power of an algorithm. An algorithm is a certain sort of formal process that

"—a tedious breakdown of the process into dead-simple steps, can be
counted on—logically—to yield a certain sort of result whenever it is
requiring no wise decisions or delicate judgments or intuitions on the

"run" or instantiated. Algorithms are not new, and were not new in Darwin's
part of the recipe-reader.

day. Many familiar arithmetic procedures, such as long division or
balancing (3) guaranteed results: Whatever it is that an algorithm does, it
always your checkbook, are algorithms, and so are the decision procedures
for does it, if it is executed without misstep. An algorithm is a foolproof
playing perfect tic-tac-toe, and for putting a list of words into alphabetical
recipe.

order. What is relatively new—permitting us valuable hindsight on
Darwin's discovery—is the theoretical reflection by mathematicians and
logicians on It is easy to see how these features made the computer

possible. Every the nature and power of algorithms in general, a twentieth-
century computer program is an algorithm, ultimately composed of simple
steps that development which led to the birth of the computer, which has led
in turn, of can be executed with stupendous reliability by one simple
mechanism or course, to a much deeper and more lively understanding of
the powers of another. Electronic circuits are the usual choice, but the
power of computers algorithms in general.

owes nothing (save speed) to the causal peculiarities of electrons darting
The term algorithm descends, via Latin (algorismus) to early English about
on silicon chips. The very same algorithms can be performed (even
(algorisme and, mistakenly therefrom, algorithm), from the name of a
faster) by devices shunting photons in glass fibers, or (much, much slower)
Persian mathematician, Muusa al-Khowarizm, whose book on arithmetical
by teams of people using paper and pencil. And as we shall see, the
capacity procedures, written about 835 A.D., was translated into Latin in
the twelfth of computers to run algorithms with tremendous speed and
reliability is now century by Adelard of Bath or Robert of Chester. The idea
that an algorithm permitting theoreticians to explore Darwin's dangerous
idea in ways is a foolproof and somehow "mechanical" procedure has been
present for heretofore impossible, with fascinating results.

centuries, but it was the pioneering work of Alan Turing, Kurt Godel, and
What Darwin discovered was not really one algorithm but, rather, a large
Alonzo Church in the 1930s that more or less fixed our current
understanding class of related algorithms that he had no clear way to
distinguish. We can of the term. Three key features of algorithms will be
important to us, and now reformulate his fundamental idea as follows:

each is somewhat difficult to define. Each, moreover, has given rise to
confusions (and anxieties ) that continue to beset our thinking about
Darwin's Life on Earth has been generated over billions of years in a single
branching revolutionary discovery, so we will have to revisit and reconsider
these tree—the Tree of Life—by o'ne algorithmic process or another.

introductory characterizations several times before we are through: What
this claim means will become clear gradually, as we sort through he (1)
substrate neutrality: The procedure for long division works equally various

ways people have tried to express it. In some versions it is utterly well with
pencil or pen, paper or parchment, neon lights or skywrit-vacuous and
uninformative; in others it is manifestly false. In be-52 AN IDEA IS BORN

Processes as Algorithms 53

tween lie the versions that really do explain the origin of species and
promise eventually, even if you are maximally stupid in making your first
choice, in to explain much else besides. These versions are becoming
clearer all the which case it just takes a little longer. Achieving success on
hard tasks in time, thanks as much to the determined criticisms of those
who frankly hate spite of utter stupidity is what makes computers seem
magical—how could the idea of evolution as an algorithm, as to the
rebuttals of those who love it.

something as mindless as a machine do something as smart as that? Not
surprisingly, then, the tactic of finessing ignorance by randomly generating
a candidate and then testing it out mechanically is a ubiquitous feature of 5.
PROCESSES AS ALGORITHMS

interesting algorithms. Not only does it not interfere with their provable
powers as algorithms; it is often the key to their power. (See Dennett 1984,
When theorists think of algorithms, they often have in mind kinds of algo-
pp 149-52, on the particularly interesting powers of Michael Rabin's
random rithms with properties that are not shared by the algorithms that
will concern algorithms.)

us. When mathematicians think about algorithms, for instance, they usually
We can begin zeroing in on the phylum of evolutionary algorithms by con-
have in mind algorithms that can be proven to compute particular sidering
everyday algorithms that share important properties with them. Dar-
mathematical functions of interest to them. (Long division is a homely win
draws our attention to repeated waves of competition and selection, so
example. A procedure for breaking down a huge number into its prime
consider the standard algorithm for organizing an elimination tournament,
factors is one that attracts attention in the exotic world of cryptography.)
But such as a tennis tournament, which eventually culminates with quarter-

finals, the algorithms that will concern us have nothing particular to do with
the semi-finals, and then a final, determining the solitary winner.

number system or other mathematical objects; they are algorithms for
sorting, winnowing, and building things.8

Because most mathematical discussions of algorithms focus on their
guaranteed or mathematically provable powers, people sometimes make the
elementary mistake of thinking that a process that makes use of chance or
randomness is not an algorithm. But even long division makes good use of
randomness!

7? 47)

Does the divisor go into the dividend six or seven or eight times? Who
knows? Who cares? You don't have to know; you don't have to have any wit
Notice that this procedure meets the three conditions. It is the same or
discernment to do long division. The algorithm directs you just to choose a
procedure whether drawn in chalk on a blackboard, or updated in a
computer digit—at random, if you like—and check out the result. If die
chosen number file, or—a weird possibility—not written down anywhere,
but simply turns out to be too small, increase it by one and start over; if too
large, enforced by building a huge fan of fenced-off tennis courts each with
two decrease it. The good thing about long division is that it always works
entrance gates and a single exit gate leading the winner to the court where
the next match is to be played. (The losers are shot and buried where they
fall) It doesn't take a genius to march the contestants through the drill,
filling in the blanks at the end of each match ( or identifying and shooting
the losers). And it always works.

8. Computer scientists sometimes restrict the term algorithm to programs
that can be But what, exactly, does this algorithm do? It takes as input a set
of com-proven to terminate—that have no infinite loops in them, for
instance. But this special petitors and guarantees to terminate by identifying
a single winner. But what sense, valuable as it is for some mathematical
purposes, is not of much use to us. Indeed, is a winner? It all depends on the

competition. Suppose the tournament in few of the computer programs in
daily use around the world would qualify as algorithms question is not
tennis but coin-tossing. One player tosses and the other calls; in this
restricted sense; most are designed to cycle indefinitely, patiently waiting
for instructions (including the instruction to terminate, without which they
keep on going).

the winner advances. The winner of this tournament will be that single
player Their subroutines, however, are algorithms in this strict sense—
except where undetec-who has won n consecutive coin-tosses without a
loss, depending on how ted "bugs" lurk that can cause the program to
"hang."

many rounds it takes to complete the tournament.

54 AN IDEA IS BORN

Processes as Algorithms 55

There is something strange and trivial about this tournament, but what is
there are tournaments of skill, like tennis tournaments. Here there is reason
to it? The winner does have a rather remarkable property. How often have
you believe that the players in the later rounds would do better again if they
ever met anyone who just won, say, ten consecutive coin-tosses without a
played the players who lost in the early rounds. There is reason to believe—

loss? Probably never. The odds against there being such a person might
seem but no guarantee—that the winner of such a tournament is the best
player of enormous, and in the normal course of events, they surely are. If
some them all, not just today but tomorrow. Yet, though any well-run
tournament gambler offered you ten-to-one odds that he could produce
someone who is guaranteed to produce a winner, there is no guarantee that a
tournament of before your very eyes would proceed to win ten consecutive
coin-tosses skill will identify the best player as the winner in any nontrivial
sense. That's using a fair coin, you might be inclined to think this a good
bet. If so, you why we sometimes say, in the opening ceremonies, "May the
best man had better hope the gambler doesn't have 1,024 accomplices (they
don't have win!"—because it is not guaranteed by the procedure. The best

player—the to cheat—they play fair and square). For that is all it takes (210
competitors) one who is best by "engineering" standards (has the most
reliable backhand, to form a ten-round tournament. The gambler wouldn't
have a clue, as the fastest serve, most stamina, etc.)—may have an off day,
or sprain his ankle, or tournament started, which person would end up being
the exhibit A that get hit by lightning. Then, trivially, he may be bested in
competition by a would guarantee his winning the wager, but the
tournament algorithm is sure player who is not really as good as he is. But
nobody would bother to produce such a person in short order—it is a sucker
bet with a surefire win organizing or entering tournaments of skill if it
weren't the case that in the for the gambler. (I am not responsible for any
injuries you may sustain if you long run, tournaments of skill are won by
the best players. That is guaranteed attempt to get rich by putting this tidbit
of practical philosophy into use.) by the very definition of a fair tournament
of skill; if there were no probability Any elimination tournament produces a
winner, who "automatically" has greater than half that the better players
would win each round, it would be a whatever property was required to
advance through the rounds, but, as the tournament of luck, not of skill.

coin-tossing tournament demonstrates, the property in question may be Skill
and luck intermingle naturally and inevitably in any real competition,

"merely historical"—a trivial fact about the competitor's past history that
has but their ratios may vary widely. A tennis tournament played on very
bumpy no bearing at all on his or her future prospects. Suppose, for
instance, the courts would raise the luck ratio, as would an innovation in
which the players United Nations were to decide that all future international
conflicts would be were required to play Russian roulette with a loaded
revolver before settled by a coin-toss to which each nation sends a
representative (if more continuing after the first set. But even in such a
luck-ridden contest, more of than one nation is involved, it will have to be
some sort of tournament—it the better players would tend, statistically, to
get to the late rounds. The might be a "round robin," which is a different
algorithm ). Whom should we power of a tournament to "discriminate" skill
differences in the long run may designate as our national representative?
The best coin-toss caller in the land, be diminished by haphazard

catastrophe, but it is not in general reduced to obviously. Suppose we
organized every man, woman, and child in the U.S.A.

zero. This fact, which is as true of evolutionary algorithms in nature as of
into a giant elimination tournament. Somebody would have to win, and that
elimination tournaments in sports, is sometimes overlooked by person
would have just won twenty-eight consecutive coin-tosses without a
commentators on evolution.

loss! This would be an irrefutable historical fact about that person, but since
Skill, in contrast to luck, is protectable; in the same or similar circum-
calling a coin-toss is just a matter of luck, there is absolutely no reason to
stances, it can be counted on to give repeat performances. This relativity to
believe that the winner of such a tournament would do any better in
circumstances shows us another way in which a tournament might be weird.

international competition than somebody else who lost in an earlier round
of What if the conditions of competition kept changing (like the croquet
game the tournament. Chance has no memory. A person who holds the
winning in Alice in Wonderland)? If you play tennis the first round, chess in
the lottery ticket has certainly been lucky, and, thanks to the millions she
has just second round, golf in the third round, and billiards in the fourth
round, there won, she may never need to be lucky again—which is just as
well, since there is no reason to suppose the eventual winner will be
particularly good, is no reason to think she is more likely than anyone else
to win the lottery a compared with the whole field, in any of these
endeavors—all the good second time, or to win the next coin-toss she calls.
( Failing to appreciate the golfers may lose in the chess round and never get
a chance to demonstrate fact that chance has no memory is known as the
Gambler's Fallacy; it is their prowess, and even if luck plays no role in the
fourth-round billiards surprisingly popular—so popular that I should
probably stress that it is a final, the winner might turn out to be the second-
worst billiards player in the fallacy, beyond any doubt or controversy.)

whole field. Thus there has to be some measure of uniformity of the In
contrast to tournaments of pure luck, like the coin-toss tournament,
conditions of competition for there to be any interesting outcome to a
tournament.

56 AN IDEA IS BORN

Processes as Algorithms 57

OceanofPDF.com

But does a tournament—or any algorithm—have to do something inter-
rithm to yield something of interest or value is not at all limited to what the
esting? No. The algorithms we tend to talk about almost always do some-
algorithm can be mathematically proven to yield in a foolproof way, and
this thing interesting—that's why they attract our attention. But a procedure
is especially true of evolutionary algorithms. Most of the controversies
about doesn't fail to be an algorithm just because it is of no conceivable use
or Darwinism, as we shall see, boil down to disagreements about just how
value to anyone. Consider a variation on the elimination-tournament algo-
powerful certain postulated evolutionary processes are—could they actually
rithm in which the losers of the semi-finals play in the finals. This is a
stupid do all this or all that in the time available? These are typically
investigations rule, destroying the point of the whole tournament, but the
tournament would into what an evolutionary algorithm might produce, or
could produce, or is still be an algorithm. Algorithms don't have to have
points or purposes. In likely to produce, and only indirectly into what such
an algorithm would addition to all the useful algorithms for alphabetizing
lists of words, there are inevitably produce. Darwin himself sets the stage in
the wording of his kazillions of algorithms for reliably misalphabetizing
words, and they work summary: his idea is a claim about what "assuredly"
the process of natural perfectly every time ( as if anyone would care ). Just
as there is an algorithm selection will "tend" to yield.

(many, actually) for finding the square root of any number, so there are All
algorithms are guaranteed to do whatever they do, but it need not be
algorithms for finding the square root of any number except 18 or 703.
Some anything interesting; some algorithms are further guaranteed to tend
(with algorithms do things so boringly irregular and pointless that there is
no probability p) to do something—which may or may not be interesting.
But if succinct way of saying what they are for. They just do what they do,
and they what an algorithm is guaranteed to do doesn't have to be
"interesting" in any do it every time.

way, how are we going to distinguish algorithms from other processes?

We can now expose perhaps the most common misunderstanding of Won't
any process be an algorithm? Is the surf pounding on the beach an

Darwinism: the idea that Darwin showed that evolution by natural selection
algorithmic process? Is the sun baking the clay of a dried-up riverbed an is
a procedure for producing Us. Ever since Darwin proposed his theory,
algorithmic process? The answer is that there may be features of these
people have often misguidedly tried to interpret it as showing that we are
the processes that are best appreciated if we consider them as algorithms!

destination, the goal, the point of all that winnowing and competition, and
Consider, for instance, the question of why the grains of sand on a beach are
our arrival on the scene was guaranteed by the mere holding of the so
uniform in size. This is due to a natural sorting process that occurs thanks
tournament. This confusion has been fostered by evolution's friends and
foes to the repetitive launching of the grains by the surf—alphabetical order
on a alike, and it is parallel to the confusion of the coin-toss tournament
winner grand scale, you might say. The pattern of cracks that appear in the
sun-who basks in the misconsidered glory of the idea that since the
tournament baked clay may be best explained by looking at chains of events
that are not had to have a winner, and since he is the winner, the tournament
had to unlike the successive rounds in a tournament.

produce him as the winner. Evolution can be an algorithm, and evolution
can Or consider the process of annealing a piece of metal to temper it. What
have produced us by an algorithmic process, without its being true that
could be a more physical, less "computational" process than that? The
evolution is an algorithm for producing us. The main conclusion of Stephen
blacksmith repeatedly heats the metal and then lets it cool, and somehow in
Jay Gould's Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the Nature of History (

the process it becomes much stronger. How? What kind of an explanation
1989a) is that if we were to "wind the tape of life back" and play it again
and can we give for this magical transformation? Does the heat create
special again, the likelihood is infinitesimal of Us being the product on any
other run toughness atoms that coat the surface? Or does it suck subatomic
glue out of through the evolutionary mill. This is undoubtedly true (if by
"Us" we mean the atmosphere that binds all the iron atoms together? No,
nothing like that the particular variety of Homo sapiens we are: hairless and
upright, with five happens. The right level of explanation is the algorithmic

level: As the metal fingers on each of two hands, speaking English and
French and playing tennis cools from its molten state, the solidification
starts in many different spots at and chess ). Evolution is not a process that
was designed to produce us, but it the same time, creating crystals that grow
together until the whole is solid.

does not follow from this that evolution is not an algorithmic process that
has But the first time this happens, the arrangement of the individual crystal
in fact produced us. ( Chapter 10 will explore this issue in more detail.)
structures is suboptimal—weakly held together, and with lots of internal
Evolutionary algorithms are manifestly interesting algorithms—interesting
stresses and strains. Heating it up again—but not all the way to melting—

to us, at least—not because what they are guaranteed to do is interesting to
partially breaks down these structures, so that, when they are permitted to
us, but because what they are guaranteed to tend to do is interesting to us.

cool the next time, the broken-up bits will adhere to the still-solid bits in a
They are like tournaments of skill in this regard. The power of an algo-
different arrangement. It can be proven mathematically that these
rearrangements will tend to get better and better, approaching 58 AN IDEA
IS BORN

Processes as Algorithms 59

the optimum or strongest total structure, provided the regime of heating and
clearer it becomes that the Mendelian story is at best a vast oversimplifica-
cooling has the right parameters. So powerful is this optimization procedure
tion. Some would go so far as to say that we have recently learned that there
that it has been used as the inspiration for an entirely general problem-really
aren't any Mendelian genes! Having climbed Mendel's ladder, we solving
technique in computer science—"simulated annealing," which has must
now throw it away. But of course no one wants to throw away such a
nothing to do with metals or heat, but is just a way of getting a computer
valuable tool, still proving itself daily in hundreds of scientific and medical
program to build, disassemble, and rebuild a data structure (such as another
contexts. The solution is to bump Mendel up a level, and declare that he,
like program), over and over, blindly groping towards a better— indeed, an

Darwin, captured an abstract truth about inheritance. We may, if we like,
optimal—version (Kirkpatrick, Gelatt and Vecchi 1983). This was one of
the talk of virtual genes, considering them to have their reality distributed
major insights leading to the development of "Boltzmann machines" and
around in the concrete materials of the DNA. (There is much to be said in

"Hopfield nets" and the other constraint-satisfaction schemes that are the
favor of this option, which I will discuss further in chapters 5 and 12.) basis
for the Connectionist or "neural-net" architectures in Artificial But then, to
return to the question raised above, are there any limits at all Intelligence.
(For overviews, see Smolensky 1983, Rumelhart 1989, on what may be
considered an algorithmic process? I guess the answer is No; Churchland
and Sejnowski 1992, and, on a philosophical level, Dennett if you wanted
to, you could treat any process at the abstract level as an 1987a, Paul
Churchland 1989)

algorithmic process. So what? Only some processes yield interesting results
If you want a deep understanding of how annealing works in metallurgy,
when you do treat them as algorithms, but we don't have to try to define you
have to learn the physics of all the forces operating at the atomic level,

"algorithm" in such a way as to include only the interesting ones (a tall of
course, but notice that the basic idea of how annealing works (and
philosophical order!). The problem will take care of itself, since nobody
will particularly why it works) can be lifted clear of those details—after all,
I just waste time examining the algorithms that aren't interesting for one
reason or explained it in simple lay terms (and I don't know the physics!).
The ex-another. It all depends on what needs explaining. If what strikes you
as planation of annealing can be put in substrate-neutral terminology: we
puzzling is the uniformity of the sand grains or the strength of the blade, an
should expect optimization of a certain sort to occur in any "material" that
algorithmic explanation is what will satisfy your curiosity—and it will be
the has components that get put together by a certain sort of building
process and truth. Other interesting features of the same phenomena, or the
processes that that can be disassembled in a sequenced way by changing a
single global created them, might not yield to an algorithmic treatment.

parameter, etc. That is what is common to the processes going on in the
Here, then, is Darwin's dangerous idea: the algorithmic level is the level
glowing steel bar and the humming supercomputer.

that best accounts for the speed of the antelope, the wing of the eagle, the
Darwin's ideas about the powers of natural selection can also be lifted out
shape of the orchid, the diversity of species, and all the other occasions for
of their home base in biology. Indeed, as we have already noted, Darwin
wonder in the world of nature. It is hard to believe that something as
mindless himself had few inklings ( and what inklings he had turned out to
be wrong ) and mechanical as an algorithm could produce such wonderful
things. No about how the microscopic processes of genetic inheritance were
accom-matter how impressive the products of an algorithm, the underlying
process plished. Not knowing any of the details about the physical
substrate, he could always consists of nothing but a set of individually
mindless steps succeeding nevertheless discern that if certain conditions
were somehow met, certain each other without the help of any intelligent
supervision; they are "auto-effects would be wrought. This substrate
neutrality has been crucial in matic" by definition: the workings of an
automaton. They feed on each other, permitting the basic Darwinian
insights to float like a cork on the waves of or on blind chance—coin-flips,
if you like—and on nothing else. Most subsequent research and
controversy, for what has happened since Darwin algorithms we are
familiar with have rather modest products: they do long has a curious flip-
flop in it. Darwin, as we noted in the preceding chapter, division or
alphabetize lists or figure out the income of the Average Taxpayer.

never hit upon the utterly necessary idea of a gene, but along came
Mendel's Fancier algorithms produce the dazzling computer-animated
graphics we see concept to provide just the right structure for making
mathematical sense out every day on television, transforming faces,
creating herds of imaginary ice-of heredity ( and solving Darwin's nasty
problem of blending inheritance).

skating polar bears, simulating whole virtual worlds of entities never seen
or And then, when DNA was identified as the actual physical vehicle of the
imagined before. But the actual biosphere is much fancier still, by many

genes, it looked at first (and still looks to many participants) as if Mendel's
orders of magnitude. Can it really be the outcome of nothing but a cascade
of genes could be simply identified as particular hunks of DNA. But then
algorithmic processes feeding on chance? And if so, who designed that
complexities began to emerge; the more scientists have learned about the
cascade? Nobody. It is itself the product of a blind, algorithmic process. As
actual molecular biology of DNA and its role in reproduction, the Darwin
himself put it, in a letter to the geologist Charles Lyell shortly after 60 AN
IDEA IS BORN

publication of Origin, "I would give absolutely nothing for the theory of
Natural Selection, if it requires miraculous additions at any one stage of
descent __ If I were convinced that I required such additions to the theory
CHAPTER THREE

of natural selection, I would reject it as rubbish..." (F. Darwin 1911, vol. 2,
pp. 6-7).

According to Darwin, then, evolution is an algorithmic process. Putting it
Universal Acid

this way is still controversial. One of the tugs-of-war going on within
evolutionary biology is between those who are relentlessly pushing,
pushing, pushing towards an algorithmic treatment, and those who, for
various submerged reasons, are resisting this trend. It is rather as if there
were metal-lurgists around who were disappointed by the algorithmic
explanation of annealing. "You mean that's all there is to it? No
submicroscopic Superglue specially created by the heating and cooling
process?" Darwin has convinced all the scientists that evolution, like
annealing, works. His radical vision of how and why it works is still
somewhat embattled, largely because those who 1. EARLY REACTIONS

resist can dimly see that their skirmish is part of a larger campaign. If the
game is lost in evolutionary biology, where will it all end?

Origin of man now proved. — Metaphysics must flourish. — He who
understands baboon would do more towards metaphysics than Locke.

—CHARLES DARWIN, in a notebook not

CHAPTER 2: Darwin conclusively demonstrated that, contrary to ancient
intended for publication, in P. H. Barrett et al.

tradition, species are not eternal and immutable; they evolve. The origin of
1987, D26, M84

new species was shown to be the result of "descent with modification." Less
conclusively, Darwin introduced an idea of how this evolutionary process
His subject is die 'Origin of Species,' & not die origin of Organization; took
place: via a mindless, mechanical— algorithmic—process he called

& it seems a needless mischief to have opened the latter speculation at

"natural selection." This idea, that all die fruits of evolution can be
explained all.

as the products of an algorithmic process, is Darwin's dangerous idea.

—H

-

ARRIET MARTINEAL , a friend of Darwin's, in a

letter to Fannie Wedgwood, March, 13, 1860,

CHAPTER 3: Many people, Darwin included, could dimly see that his idea
of quoted in Desmond and Moore 1991, p. 486

natural selection had revolutionary potential, but just what did it promise to
overthrow? Darwin's idea can be used to dismantle and then rebuild a
Darwin began his explanation in the middle, or even, you might say, at the
traditional structure of Western thought, which I call die Cosmic Pyramid.

end. starting with the life forms we presently see, and showing how the This
provides a new explanation of the origin, by gradual accumulation, of
patterns in today's biosphere could be explained as having arisen by the all

the Design in the universe. Ever since Darwin, skepticism has been aimed
process of natural selection from the patterns in yesterday's biosphere, and
so at his implicit claim that the various processes of natural selection, in
spite of on, back into the very distant past. He started with facts that
everyone their underlying mindlessness, are powerful enough to have done
all the knows: all of today's living things are the offspring of parents, who
are the design work that is manifest in the world.

offspring of grandparents, and so forth, so everything that is alive today is a
branch of a genealogical family, which is itself a branch of a larger clan. He
went on to argue that, if you go back far enough, you find that all the
branches of all the families eventually spring from common ancestral limbs,
so that there is a single Tree of Life, all the limbs, branches, and twigs
united by descent with modification. The fact that it has the branching
organization of a tree is crucial to the explanation of the sort of process
involved, for such 62 UNIVERSAL ACID

Early Reactions 63

a tree could be created by an automatic, recursive process: first build an x,
Did you ever hear of universal acid? This fantasy used to amuse me and
then modify x's descendants, then modify those modifications, then modify
some of my schoolboy friends—I have no idea whether we invented or the
modifications of the modifications— If Life is a Tree, it could all have
inherited it, along with Spanish fly and saltpeter, as a part of underground
arisen from an inexorable, automatic rebuilding process in which designs
youth culture. Universal acid is a liquid so corrosive that it will eat through
would accumulate over time.

anything! The problem is: what do you keep it in? It dissolves glass bottles
Working backwards, starting at or near "the end" of a process, and solving
and stainless-steel canisters as readily as paper bags. What would happen if
the next-to-last step before asking how it could have been produced, is a
tried you somehow came upon or created a dollop of universal acid? Would
the and true method of computer programmers, particularly when creating
whole planet eventually be destroyed? What would it leave in its wake?

programs that use recursion. Usually this is a matter of practical modesty: if
After everything had been transformed by its encounter with universal acid,
you don't want to bite off more than you can chew, the right bite to start
with what would the world look like? Little did I realize that in a few years
I is often the finishing bite, if you can find it. Darwin found it, and then
very would encounter an idea—Darwin's idea—bearing an unmistakable
likeness cautiously worked his way back, skirting around the many grand
issues that to universal acid: it eats through just about every traditional
concept, and his investigations stirred up, musing about them in his private
notebooks, but leaves in its wake a revolutionized world-view, with most of
the old land-postponing their publication indefinitely. (For instance, he
deliberately marks still recognizable, but transformed in fundamental ways.

avoided discussing human evolution in Origin; see the discussion in R. J.

Darwin's idea had been born as an answer to questions in biology, but it
Richards 1987, pp. 160ff.) But he could see where all this was leading, and,
threatened to leak out, offering answers—welcome or not—to questions in
in spite of his near-perfect silence on these troubling extrapolations, so
could cosmology (going in one direction) and psychology (going in the
other di-many of his readers. Some loved what they thought they saw, and
others rection ). If redesign could be a mindless, algorithmic process of
evolution, hated it.

why couldn't that whole process itself be the product of evolution, and so
Karl Marx was exultant: "Not only is a death blow dealt here for the first
forth, all the way down? And if mindless evolution could account for the
time to 'Teleology' in the natural sciences but their rational meaning is
breathtakingly clever artifacts of the biosphere, how could the products of
empirically explained" (quoted in Rachels 1991, p. 110). Friedrich
Nietzsche our own "real" minds be exempt from an evolutionary
explanation? Darwin's saw—through the mists of his contempt for all things
English—an even more idea thus also threatened to spread all the way up,
dissolving the illusion of cosmic message in Darwin: God is dead. If
Nietzsche is the father of our own authorship, our own divine spark of
creativity and understanding.

existentialism, then perhaps Darwin deserves the title of grandfather. Others
Much of the controversy and anxiety that has enveloped Darwin's idea were
less enthralled with the thought that Darwin's views were utterly ever since
can be understood as a series of failed campaigns in the struggle subversive
to sacred tradition. Samuel Wilberforce, Bishop of Oxford, whose to
contain Darwin's idea within some acceptably "safe" and merely partial
debate with Thomas Huxley in June 1860 was one of the most celebrated
revolution. Cede some or all of modern biology to Darwin, perhaps, but
hold confrontations between Darwinism and the religious establishment
(see the line there! Keep Darwinian thinking out of cosmology, out of
chapter 12), said in an anonymous review:

psychology, out of human culture, out of ethics, politics, and religion! In
these campaigns, many battles have been won by the forces of containment:
Man's derived supremacy over the earth; man's power of articulate speech;
flawed applications of Darwin's idea have been exposed and discredited,
man's gift of reason; man's free-will and responsibility ...—all are equally
beaten back by the champions of the pre-Darwinian tradition. But new
waves and utterly irreconcilable with the degrading notion of the brute
origin of of Darwinian thinking keep coming. They seem to be improved
versions, not him who was created in the image of God __ [Wilberforce
1860.]

vulnerable to the refutations that defeated their predecessors, but are they
sound extensions of the unquestionably sound Darwinian core idea, or
might When speculation on these extensions of his view arose, Darwin
wisely they, too, be perversions of it, and even more virulent, more
dangerous, than chose to retreat to the security of his base camp, the
magnificently provi-the abuses of Darwin already refuted?

sioned and defended thesis that began in the middle, with life already on the
Opponents of the spread differ sharply over tactics. Just where should the
scene, and "merely" showed how, once this process of design accumulation
protective dikes be built? Should we try to contain the idea within biology
was under way, it could proceed without any (further?) intervention from
any itself, with one post-Darwinian counterrevolution or another? Among
those Mind. But, as many of his readers appreciated, however comforting

this who have favored this tactic is Stephen Jay Gould, who has offered
several modest disclaimer might be, it was not really a stable resting place.

different revolutions of containment. Or should we place the barriers far-64
UNIVERSAL ACID

Darwin's Assault on the Cosmic Pyramid 65

ther out? To get our bearings in this series of campaigns, we should start
with or end "so as to obtain the best result." This fitting of means to ends a
crude map of the pre-Darwinian territory. As we shall see, it will have to be
implies, argued Aquinas, an intention. But, seeing as natural bodies lack
consciousness, they cannot supply that intention themselves. "Therefore
revised again and again to make accommodations as various skirmishes are
some intelligent being exists by whom all natural things are directed to lost.

their end; and this being we call God." [Davies 1992, p. 200.]

Hume's Cleanthes, following in this tradition, lumps the adapted marvels 2.
DARWIN'S ASSAULT ON THE COSMIC PYRAMID

of the living world with the regularities of the heavens—it's all like a
wonderful clockwork to him. But Darwin suggests a division: Give me Or-
A prominent feature of Pre-Darwinian world-views is an overall top-toder,
he says, and time, and I will give you Design. Let me start with regu-bottom
map of things. This is often described as a Ladder; God is at the top, larity
—the mere purposeless, mindless, pointless regularity of physics—and with
human beings a rung or two below (depending on whether angels are I will
show you a process that eventually will yield products that exhibit not part
of the scheme). At the bottom of the Ladder is Nothingness, or maybe just
regularity but purposive design. (This was just what Karl Marx thought
Chaos, or maybe Locke's inert, motionless Matter. Alternatively, the scale is
he saw when he declared that Darwin had dealt a death blow to Teleology: a
Tower, or, in the intellectual historian Arthur Lovejoy's memorable phrase
Darwin had reduced teleology to nonteleology, Design to Order.) (1936), a
Great Chain of Being composed of many links. John Locke's Before
Darwin, the difference between Order and Design didn't loom argument has
already drawn our attention to a particularly abstract version of large,

because in any case it all came down from God. The whole universe the
hierarchy, which I will call the Cosmic Pyramid: was His artifact, a product
of His Intelligence, His Mind. Once Darwin jumped into the middle with
his proposed answer to the question of how God

Design could arise from mere Order, the rest of the Cosmic Pyramid was
put M i n d

in jeopardy. Suppose we accept that Darwin has explained the Design of the
D e s i g n

bodies of plants and animals (including our own bodies—we have to admit
O r d e r

that Darwin has placed us firmly in the animal kingdom ). Looking up, if
we C h a o s

concede to Darwin our bodies, can we keep him from taking our minds as N
o t h i n g

well? (We will address this question, in many forms, in part III.) Looking
(Warning: each term in the pyramid must be understood in an old-
fashioned, down, Darwin asks us to give him Order as a premise, but is
there anything pre-Darwinian sense!)

to keep him from stepping down a level and giving himself an algorithmic
Everything finds its place on one level or another of the Cosmic Pyramid,
account of the origin of Order out of mere Chaos? (We will address this
even blank nothingness, the ultimate foundation. Not all matter is Ordered,
question in chapter 6.)

some is in Chaos; only some Ordered matter is also Designed; only some
The vertigo and revulsion this prospect provokes in many was perfectly
Designed things have Minds, and of course only one Mind is God. God, the
expressed in an early attack on Darwin, published anonymously in 1868:
first Mind, is the source and explanation of everything underneath. (Since
everything thus depends on God, perhaps we should say it is a chandelier,
In the theory with which we have to deal, Absolute Ignorance is the

hanging from God, rather than a pyramid, supporting Him.) artificer; so that
we may enunciate as the fundamental principle of the What is the difference
between Order and Design? As a first stab, we whole system, that, IN
ORDER TO MAKE A PERFECT AND BEAUTIFUL MACHINE, IT IS
NOT

REQUISITE TO KNOW HOW TO MAKE IT. This proposition will be
found, on careful might say that Order is mere regularity, mere pattern;
Design is Aristotle's examination, to express, in condensed form, the
essential purport of the telos, an exploitation of Order for a purpose, such as
we see in a cleverly Theory, and to express in a few words all Mr. Darwin's
meaning; who, by designed artifact. The solar system exhibits stupendous
Order, but does not a strange inversion of reasoning, seems to think
Absolute Ignorance fully (apparently) have a purpose—it isn't/or anything.
An eye, in contrast, is for qualified to take the place of Absolute Wisdom in
all the achievements of seeing. Before Darwin, this distinction was not
always clearly marked. In-creative skill. [MacKenzie 1868.]

deed, it was positively blurred:

Exactly! Darwin's "strange inversion of reasoning" was in fact a new and In
the thirteenth century, Aquinas offered the view that natural bodies
wonderful way of thinking, completely overturning the Mind-first way that

[such as planets, raindrops, volcanos] act as if guided toward a definite goal
66 UNIVERSAL ACID

Darwin's Assault on the Cosmic Pyramid 67

John Locke "proved" and David Hume could see no way around. John
evolution, Darwin saw the crack widen and wrote to him: "I hope you have
Dewey nicely described the inversion some years later, in his insightful
book not murdered too completely your own and my child" (Desmond and
Moore The Influence of Darwin on Philosophy: "Interest shifts ... from an
1991, p. 569).

intelligence that shaped things once for all to the particular intelligences But
was it really so inevitable that Darwin's idea should lead to such which

things are even now shaping" (Dewey 1910, p. 15). But the idea of
revolution and subversion? "It is obvious that the critics did not wish to
treating Mind as an effect rather than as a First Cause is too revolutionary
for understand, and to some extent Darwin himself encouraged their wishful
some—an "awful stretcher" that their own minds cannot accommodate
thinking" (Ellegard 1956). Wallace wanted to ask what the purpose of
comfortably. This is as true today as it was in 1860, and it has always been
as natural selection might be, and though this might seem in retrospect to be
true of some of evolution's best friends as of its foes. For instance, the
squandering the fortune he and Darwin had uncovered, it was an idea for
physicist Paul Davies, in his recent book The Mind of God, proclaims that
the which Darwin himself often expressed sympathy. Instead of reducing
tele-reflective power of human minds can be "no trivial detail, no minor by-
ology all the way to purposeless Order, why couldn't we reduce all
mundane product of mindless purposeless forces" (Davies 1992, p. 232).
This is a most teleology to a single purpose: God's purpose? Wasn't this an
obvious and revealing way of expressing a familiar denial, for it betrays an
ill-examined inviting way to plug the dike? Darwin was clear in his own
mind that the prejudice. Why, we might ask Davies, would its being a by-
product of variation on which the process of natural selection depended had
to be mindless, purposeless forces make it trivial? Why couldn't the most
important unplanned and undesigned, but the process itself might have a
purpose, thing of all be something that arose from unimportant things? Why
should mightn't it? In a letter in I860 to the American naturalist Asa Gray,
an early the importance or excellence of anything have to rain down on it
from on supporter, Darwin wrote, "I am inclined to look at everything as
resulting high, from something more important, a gift from God? Darwin's
inversion from designed [emphasis added] laws, with the details whether
good or bad, suggests that we abandon that presumption and look for sorts
of excellence, left to the working out of what we may call chance" (F.
Darwin 1911, vol. 2, of worth and purpose, that can emerge, bubbling up
out of "mindless, p. 105).

purposeless forces."

Automatic processes are themselves often creations of great brilliance.

Alfred Russel Wallace, whose own version of evolution by natural selec-
From today's vantage point, we can see that the inventors of the automatic
tion arrived on Darwin's desk while he was still delaying publication of
transmission and the automatic door-opener were no idiots, and their genius
Origin, and whom Darwin managed to treat as codiscoverer of the
principle, lay in seeing how to create something that could do something
"clever"

never quite got the point.1 Although at the outset Wallace was much more
without having to think about it. Indulging in some anachronism, we could
forthcoming on the subject of the evolution of the human mind than Darwin
say that, to some observers in Darwin's day, it seemed that he had left open
was willing to be, and stoutly maintained at first that human minds were no
the possibility that God did His handiwork by designing an automatic
design-exception to the rule that all features of living things were products
of maker. And to some of these, the idea was not just a desperate stopgap
but a evolution, he could not see the "strange inversion of reasoning" as the
key to positive improvement on tradition. The first chapter of Genesis
describes the the greatness of the great idea. Echoing John Locke, Wallace
proclaimed that successive waves of Creation and ends each with the refrain
"and God saw

"the marvelous complexity of forces which appear to control matter, if not
that it was good." Darwin had discovered a way to eliminate this retail
actually to constitute it, are and must be mind-products" (Gould 1985, p.

application of Intelligent Quality Control; natural selection would take care
397). When, later in his life, Wallace converted to spiritualism and
exempted of that without further intervention from God. (The seventeenth-
century human consciousness altogether from the iron rule of philosopher
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz had defended a similar hands-off vision of God
the Creator.) As Henry Ward Beecher put it, "Design by wholesale is
grander than design by retail" (Rachels 1991, p. 99). Asa Gray, captivated
by Darwin's new idea but trying to reconcile it with as much of "is
traditional religious creed as possible, came up with this marriage of 1. This
fascinating and even excruciating story has been well told many times, but
still the convenience: God intended the "stream of variations" and foresaw

just how controversies rage. Why did Darwin delay publication in the first
place? Was his treatment of Wallace generous or monstrously unfair? The
unsettled relations between Dar-the laws of nature He had laid down would
prune this stream over the eons.

win and Wallace are not just a matter of Darwin's uneasy conscience about
how he As John Dewey later aptly remarked, invoking yet another
mercantile met-handled Wallace's innocent claim-jumping correspondence;
as we see here, the two were aphor, "Gray held to what may be called
design on the installment plan"

also separated by vast differences in insight and attitude about the idea they
both dis-

(Dewey 1910, p. 12).

covered. For particularly good accounts, see Desmond and Moore 1991;
Richards 1987, pp. 159-61.

68 UNIVERSAL ACID

The Principle of the Accumulation of Design 69

It is not unusual to find such metaphors, redolent of capitalism, in evo-
Second Law, the universe is unwinding out of a more ordered state into the
lutionary explanations. Examples are often gleefully recounted by those
ultimately disordered state known as the heat death of the universe.2

critics and interpreters of Darwin who see this language as revealing—or
What, then, are living things? They are things that defy this crumbling into
should we say betraying—the social and political environment in which
dust, at least for a while, by not being isolated—by taking in from their
Darwin developed his ideas, thereby ( somehow ) discrediting their claim to
environment the wherewithal to keep life and limb together. The psychol-
scientific objectivity. It is certainly true that Darwin, being an ordinary ogist
Richard Gregory summarizes the idea crisply:

mortal, was the inheritor of a huge manifold of concepts, modes of expres-
Time's arrow given by Entropy—the loss of organization, or loss of tem-
sion, attitudes, biases, and visions that went with his station in life (as a
perature differences—is statistical and it is subject to local small-scale
Victorian Englishman might put it), but it is also true that the economic
reversals. Most striking: life is a systematic reversal of Entropy, and intel-
metaphors that come so naturally to mind when one is thinking about
ligence creates structures and energy differences against the supposed
evolution get their power from one of the deepest features of Darwin's
gradual 'death' through Entropy of the physical Universe. [Gregory 1981,
discovery.

p. 136.]

Gregory goes on to credit Darwin with the fundamental enabling idea: "It 3.
THE PRINCIPLE OF THE ACCUMULATION OF DESIGN

is the measure of the concept of Natural Selection that increases in the
complexity and order of organisms in biological time can now be under-The
key to understanding Darwin's contribution is granting the premise of
stood." Not just individual organisms, but the whole process of evolution
that the Argument from Design. What conclusion ought one to draw if one
found creates them, thus can be seen as fundamental physical phenomena
running a watch lying on the heath in the wilderness? As Paley ( and
Hume's Clean-contrary to the larger trend of cosmic time, a feature captured
by William thes before him ) insisted, a watch exhibits a tremendous
amount of work Calvin in one of the meanings of the title of his classic
exploration of the done. Watches and other designed objects don't just
happen; they have to be relationship between evolution and cosmology, The
River That Flows Uphill: the product of what modern industry calls "R and
D"—research and A Journey from the Big Bang to the Big Brain (1986).

development—and R and D is costly, in both time and energy. Before DarA
designed thing, then, is either a living thing or a part of a living thing, or
win, the only model we had of a process by which this sort of R-and-D
work the artifact of a living thing, organized in any case in aid of this battle
against could be done was an Intelligent Artificer. What Darwin saw was
that in disorder. It is not impossible to oppose the trend of the Second Law,

but it is principle the same work could be done by a different sort of process
that costly. Consider iron. Iron is a very useful element, essential for our
bodily distributed that work over huge amounts of time, by thriftily
conserving the health, and also valuable as the major component of steel,
that wonderful design work that had been accomplished at each stage, so
that it didn't have building material. Our planet used to have vast reserves of
iron ore, but they to be done over again. In other words, Darwin had hit
upon what we might are gradually being depleted. Does this mean that the
Earth is running out of call the Principle of Accumulation of Design. Things
in the world (such as iron? Hardly. With the trivial exception of a few tons
that have recently been watches and organisms and who knows what else)
may be seen as products launched out of Earth's effective gravitational field
in the form of space-embodying a certain amount of Design, and one way
or another, that Design probe components, there is just as much iron on the
planet today as there had to have been created by a process of R and D.
Utter undesignedness—

ever was. The trouble is that more and more of it is scattered about in the
pure chaos in the old-fashioned sense—was the null or starting point.

form of rust (molecules of iron oxide), and other low-grade, low-A more
recent idea about the difference—and tight relation—between concentration
materials. In principle, it could all be recovered, but that would Design and
Order will help clarify the picture. This is the proposal, first take enormous
amounts of energy, craftily focused on the particular project popularized by
the physicist Erwin Schrodinger (1967), that Life can be of extracting and
reconcentrating the iron.

defined in terms of the Second Law of Thermodynamics. In physics, order
or It is the organization of just such sophisticated processes that constitutes
organization can be measured in terms of heat differences between regions
of space time; entropy is simply disorder, the opposite of order, and
according to the Second Law, the entropy of any isolated system increases
with time. In other words, things run down, inevitably. According to the 2.
And where did the initial order come from? The best discussion I have
encountered of

"is good question is "Cosmology and the Arrow of Time," ch. 7 of Penrose
1989.

70 UNIVERSAL ACID

The Principle of the Accumulation of Design 71

the hallmark of life. Gregory dramatizes this with an unforgettable example.

noted: If God created and designed all these wonderful things, who created
A standard textbook expression of the directionality imposed by the Second
God? Supergod? And who created Supergod? Superdupergod? Or did God
Law of Thermodynamics is the claim that you can't unscramble an egg.
Well, create Himself? Was it hard work? Did it take time? Don't ask! Well,
then, we not that you absolutely can't, but that it would be an extremely
costly, may ask instead whether this bland embrace of mystery is any
improvement sophisticated task, uphill all the way against the Second Law.
Now consider: over just denying the principle that intelligence (or design)
must spring from how expensive would it be to make a device that would
take scrambled eggs Intelligence. Darwin offered an explanatory path that
actually honored as input and deliver unscrambled eggs as output? There is
one ready solution: Paley's insight: real work went into designing this
watch, and work isn't free.

put a live hen in the box! Feed it scrambled eggs, and it will be able to
make How much design does a thing exhibit? No one has yet offered a
system of eggs for you—for a while. Hens don't normally strike us as near-
design quantification that meets all our needs. Theoretical work that bears
on miraculously sophisticated entities, but here is one thing a hen can do,
thanks this interesting question is under way in several disciplines,3 and in
chapter 6

to the Design that has organized it, that is still way beyond the reach of the
we will consider a natural metric that provides a neat solution to special
devices created by human engineers.

cases—but in the meantime we have a powerful intuitive sense of different

The more Design a thing exhibits, the more R-and-D work had to have
amounts of design. Automobiles contain more design than bicycles, sharks
occurred to produce it. Like any good revolutionary, Darwin exploits as
contain more design than amoebas, and even a short poem contains more
much as possible of the old system: the vertical dimension of the Cosmic
design than a "Keep Off the Grass" sign. (I can hear the skeptical reader
Pyramid is retained, and becomes the measure of how much Design has
gone saying, "Whoa! Slow down! Is this supposed to be uncon-troversial?"
Not by into the items at that level. In Darwin's scheme, as in the traditional
Pyramid, a long shot. In due course I will attempt to justify these claims,
but for the Minds do end up near the top, among the most designed of
entities (in part time being I want to draw attention to, and build on, some
familiar—but because they are the self-redesigning things, as we shall see
in chapter 13).

admittedly unreliable—intuitions.)

But this means that they are among the most advanced ejfects (to date) of
the Patent law, including the law of copyright, is a repository of our
practical creative process, not—as in the old version—its cause or source.
Their grasp of the question. How much novelty of design counts as enough
to products in turn—the human artifacts that were our initial model—must
justify a patent? How much can one borrow from the intellectual products
of count as more designed still. This may seem counterintuitive at first. A
Keats others without recompense or acknowledgment? These are slippery
slopes on ode may seem to have some claim to having a grander R and D
pedigree than which we have had to construct some rather arbitrary
terraces, codifying a nightingale—at least it might seem so to a poet
ignorant of biology—but what otherwise would be a matter of interminable
dispute. The burden of what about a paper clip? Surely a paper clip is a
trivial product of design proof in these disputes is fixed by our intuitive
sense of how much design is compared with any living thing, however
rudimentary. In one obvious sense, too much design to be mere
coincidence. Our intuitions here are very strong yes, but reflect for a
moment. Put yourself in Paley's shoes, but walking and, I promise to show,
sound. Suppose an author is accused of plagiarism, along the apparently
deserted beach on an alien planet. Which discovery and the evidence is, say,

a single paragraph that is almost identical to a would excite you the most: a
clam or a clam-rake? Before the planet could paragraph in the putative
source. Might this be just a coincidence? It depends make a clam-rake, it
would have to make a clam-rake-maker, and that is a crucially on how
mundane and formulaic the paragraph is, but most more designed thing by
far than a clam.

paragraph-length passages of text are "special" enough (in ways we will
soon Only a theory with the logical shape of Darwin's could explain how
explore) to make independent creation highly unlikely. No reasonable jury
designed things came to exist, because any other sort of explanation would
be would require the prosecutor in a plagiarism case to demonstrate exactly
the either a vicious circle or an infinite regress ( Dennett 1975 ). The old
way, causal pathway by which the alleged copying took place. The
defendant Locke's Mind-first way, endorsed the principle that it takes an
Intelligence to would clearly have the burden of establishing that his work
was, remarkably, make an intelligence. This idea must have always seemed
self-evident to our an independent work rather than a copying of work
already done.

ancestors, the artifact-makers, going back to Homo habilis, the "handy"
man, A similar burden of proof falls on the defendant in an industrial-
espionage from whom Homo sapiens, the "knowing" man, descended.
Nobody ever saw a spear fashion a hunter out of raw materials. Children
chant, "It takes one to know one," but an even more persuasive slogan
would seem to be "It takes a 3. For accessible overviews of some of the
ideas, see Pagels 1988, Stewart and Golubitsky greater one to make a lesser
one." Any view inspired by this slogan 1992, and Langton et al. 1992.

immediately faces an embarrassing question, however, as Hume had 72
UNIVERSAL ACID

The Tools for R and D: Skyhooks or Cranes? 73

case: the interior of the defendant's new line of widgets looks suspiciously
hence has value at least in the sense that it is something that might be
similar in design to that of the plaintiff's line of widgets—is this an innocent
conserved (and then stolen or sold), finds robust expression in economic

case of convergent evolution of design? Really the only way to prove your
terms. Had Darwin not had the benefit of being born into a mercantile
world innocence in such a case is to show clear evidence of actually having
done that had already created its Adam Smith and its Thomas Malthus, he
would the necessary R-and-D work (old blueprints, rough drafts, early
models and not have been in position to find ready-made pieces he could
put together meckups, memos about the problems encountered, etc.). In the
absence of into a new, value-added product. (You see, the idea applies to
itself very such evidence, but also in the absence of any physical evidence
of your nicely.) The various sources of the Design that went into Darwin's
grand idea espionage activities, you would be convicted—and you'd
deserve to be!

give us important insights into the idea itself, but do no more to diminish its
Cosmic coincidences on such a scale just don't happen.

value or threaten its objectivity than the humble origins of methane
diminish The same burden of proof now reigns in biology, thanks to
Darwin. What I its BTUs when it is put to use as a fuel.

am calling the Principle of Accumulation of Design doesn't logically
require that all design (on this planet) descend via one branch or another
from a single trunk (or root or seed), but it says that since each new
designed thing 4. THE TOOLS FOR R AND D: SKYHOOKS OR
CRANES?

that appears must have a large design investment in its etiology somewhere,
the cheapest hypothesis will always be that the design is largely copied
from The work of R and D is not like shoveling coal; it is somehow a sort
of earlier designs, which are copied from earlier designs, and so forth, so
that

"intellectual" work, and this fact grounds the other family of metaphors that
actual R-and-D innovation is minimized. We know for a fact, of course, that
has both enticed and upset, enlightened and confused, the thinkers who
have many designs have been independently re-invented many times—eyes,
for confronted Darwin's "strange inversion of reasoning": the apparent
instance, dozens of times—but every case of such convergent evolution

must attribution of intelligence to the very process of natural selection that
Darwin insisted was not intelligent.

be proven against a background in which most of the design is copied. It is
Was it not unfortunate, in fact, that Darwin had chosen to call his principle
logically possible that all the life forms in South America were created

"natural selection" with its anthropomorphic connotations? Wouldn't it have
independently of all the life forms in the rest of the world, but this is a
wildly been better, as Asa Gray suggested to him, to replace the imagery
about extravagant hypothesis that would need to be demonstrated, piece by
piece.

"nature's Guiding Hand" with a discussion of the different ways of winning
Suppose we discover, on some remote island, a novel species of bird. Even
if life's race (Desmond and Moore 1991, p. 458)? Many people just didn't
get we don't yet have direct confirmatory evidence that this bird is related to
all it, and Darwin was inclined to blame himself: "I must be a very bad the
other birds in the world, that is our overpoweringly secure default
explainer," he said, conceding: "I suppose 'natural selection' was a bad
term"

assumption, after Darwin, because birds are very special designs.4

(Desmond and Moore 1991, p. 492). Certainly this Janus-faced term has So
the fact that organisms—and computers and books and other arti-
encouraged more than a century of heated argument. A recent opponent of
facts—are effects of very special chains of causation is not, after Darwin, a
Darwin sums it up:

merely reliable generalization, but a deep fact out of which to build a
theory.

Hume recognized the point—"Throw several pieces of steel together,
without Life on Earth, initially thought to constitute a sort of prima facie
case for a shape or form; they will never arrange themselves to compose a
watch"—but creator, was, as a result of Darwin's idea, envisioned merely as
being the he and other, earlier, thinkers thought they had to ground this deep

fact in outcome of a process and a process mat was, according to
Dobzhansky, Mind. Darwin came to see how to distribute it in vast spaces
of Nonmind,

"blind, mechanical, automatic, impersonal," and, according to de Beer, was
thanks to his ideas about how design innovations could be conserved and

"wasteful, blind, and blundering." But as soon as these criticisms [sic] were
reproduced, and hence accumulated.

leveled at natural selection, the "blind process" itself was compared to a
The idea that Design is something that has taken work to create, and poet, a
composer, a sculptor, Shakespeare—to the very notion of creativity that the
idea of natural selection had originally replaced. It is clear, I think, that
there was something very, very wrong with such an idea. [Bethell 1976.]

4. Note, by the way, that it would not follow logically that the bird was
related to other birds if we found that its DNA was almost identical in
sequence to that of other birds!

Or something very, very right. It seems to skeptics like Bethell that there

"Just a coincidence, not plagiarism," would be a logical possibility—but
one that nobody is something willfully paradoxical in calling the process of
evolution the would take seriously.

blind watchmaker" (Dawkins 1986a), for this takes away with the left hand

74 UNIVERSAL ACID

The Tools for R and D: Skyhooks or Cranes? 75

("blind") the very discernment, purpose, and foresight it gives with the right
There are cranes, however. Cranes can do the lifting work our imaginary
hand. But others see that this manner of speaking—and we shall find that it
is skyhooks might do, and they do it in an honest, non-question-begging not
just ubiquitous but irreplaceable in contemporary biology—is just the

fashion. They are expensive, however. They have to be designed and built,
right way to express the myriads of detailed discoveries that Darwinian
from everyday parts already on hand, and they have to be located on a firm
theory helps to expose. There is simply no denying the breathtaking base of
existing ground. Skyhooks are miraculous lifters, unsupported and
brilliance of the designs to be found in nature. Time and again, biologists
insupportable. Cranes are no less excellent as lifters, and they have the
baffled by some apparently futile or maladroit bit of bad design in nature
decided advantage of being real. Anyone who is, like me, a lifelong
onlooker have eventually come to see that they have underestimated the
ingenuity, the at construction sites will have noticed with some satisfaction
that it sheer brilliance, the depth of insight to be discovered in one of
Mother sometimes takes a small crane to set up a big crane. And it must
have Nature's creations. Francis Crick has mischievously baptized this trend
in the occurred to many other onlookers that in principle this big crane
could be name of his colleague Leslie Orgel, speaking of what he calls
"Orgel's used to enable or speed up the building of a still more spectacular
crane.

Second Rule: Evolution is cleverer than you are." (An alternative formula-
Cascading cranes is a tactic that seldom if ever gets used more than once in
tion: Evolution is cleverer than Leslie Orgel!)

real-world construction projects, but in principle there is no limit to the
Darwin shows us how to climb from "Absolute Ignorance" (as his
outnumber of cranes that could be organized in series to accomplish some
raged critic said ) to creative genius without begging any questions, but we
mighty end.

must tread very carefully, as we shall see. Among the controversies that
swirl Now imagine all the "lifting" that has to get done in Design Space to
around us, most if not all consist of different challenges to Darwin's claim
create the magnificent organisms and (other) artifacts we encounter in our
that he can take us all the way to here (the wonderful world we inhabit)
from world. Vast distances must have been traversed since the dawn of life
with there (the world of chaos or utter undesignedness) in the time available
the earliest, simplest self-replicating entities, spreading outward (diversity)

without invoking anything beyond the mindless mechanicity of the and
upward (excellence). Darwin has offered us an account of the crudest,
algorithmic processes he had proposed. Since we have reserved the vertical
most rudimentary, stupidest imaginable lifting process—the wedge of
natural dimension of the traditional Cosmic Pyramid as a measure of
(intuitive ) selection. By taking tiny—the tiniest possible—steps, this
process can designedness, we can dramatize the challenge with the aid of
another fantasy gradually, over eons, traverse these huge distances. Or so he
claims. At no item drawn from folklore.

point would anything miraculous—from on high—be needed. Each step has
skyhook, orig. Aeronaut. An imaginary contrivance for attachment to the
been accomplished by brute, mechanical, algorithmic climbing, from the
sky; an imaginary means of suspension in the sky. [Oxford English Dictio-
base already built by the efforts of earlier climbing.

nary.}

It does seem incredible. Could it really have happened? Or did the process
need a "leg up" now and then (perhaps only at the very beginning) from one
The first use noted by the OED is from 1915: "an aeroplane pilot
commanded sort of skyhook or another? For over a century, skeptics have
been trying to to remain in place (aloft) for another hour, replies 'the
machine is not fitted find a proof that Darwin's idea just can't work, at least
not all the way. They with skyhooks.' " The skyhook concept is perhaps a
descendant of the dens have been hoping for, hunting for, praying for
skyhooks, as exceptions to ex machina of ancient Greek dramaturgy, when
second-rate playwrights what they see as the bleak vision of Darwin's
algorithm churning away. And found their plots leading their heroes into
inescapable difficulties, they were time and again, they have come up with
truly interesting challenges—leaps often tempted to crank down a god onto
the scene, like Super-man, to save and gaps and other marvels that do seem,
at first, to need the situation supernaturally. Or skyhooks may be an entirely
independent creation of convergent folkloric evolution. Skyhooks would be
wonderful things to have, great for lifting unwieldy objects out of difficult
circumstances, and speeding up all sorts of construction projects. Sad to

say, makes them financially sound investments—is that we often do want
very much to attach they are impossible.5

something (such as an antenna or a camera or telescope) to a place high in
the sky.

Satellites are impractical for lifting, alas, because they have to be placed so
high in the sky. The idea has been carefully explored. It turns out that a rope
of the strongest artificial fiber yet made would have to be over a hundred
meters in diameter at the top—it could 5. Well, not quite impossible.
Geostationary satellites, orbiting in unison with the Earth's taper to a nearly
invisible fishing line on its way down—just to suspend its own weight,
rotation, are a kind of real, nonmiraculous skyhook. What makes them so
valuable—what let alone any payload. Even if you could spin such a cable,
you wouldn't want it falling out of orbit onto the city below!

76 UNIVERSAL ACID

The Tools for R and D: Skyhooks or Cranes? 77

skyhooks. But then along have come the cranes, discovered in many cases
by earlier, slower evolutionary processes. If the creationists were right that
the very skeptics who were hoping to find a skyhook.

mankind is a species unto itself, divine and inaccessible via brute
Darwinian It is time for some more careful definitions. Let us understand
that a paths, then genetic engineering would not be a crane after all, having
been skyhook is a "mind-first" force or power or process, an exception to
the created with the help of a major skyhook. I don't imagine that any
genetic principle that all design, and apparent design, is ultimately the result
of engineers think of themselves this way, but it is a logically available
perch, mindless, motiveless mechanicity. A crane, in contrast, is a
subprocess or however precarious. Less obviously silly is this idea: if the
bodies of genetic special feature of a design process that can be
demonstrated to permit the engineers are products of evolution, but their
minds can do creative things local speeding up of the basic, slow process of
natural selection, and that can that are irreducibly nonalgorithmic or
inaccessible by all algorithmic paths, be demonstrated to be itself the

predictable (or retrospectively explicable ) then the leaps of genetic
engineering might involve a skyhook. Exploring product of the basic
process. Some cranes are obvious and uncon-troversial; this prospect will
be the central topic of chapter 15.

others are still being argued about, very fruitfully. Just to give a general
sense A crane with a particularly interesting history is theBaldwin-Effect,
named of the breadth and application of the concept, let me point to three
very for one of its discoverers, James Mark Baldwin (1896), but more or
less different examples.

simultaneously discovered by two other early Darwinians, Conwy Lloyd It
is now generally agreed among evolutionary theorists that sex is a crane.

Morgan (famed for Lloyd Morgan's Canon of Parsimony [for discussion,
see That is, species that reproduce sexually can move through Design Space
at a Dennett 1983]) and H. F. Osborn. Baldwin was an enthusiastic
Darwinian, much greater speed than that achieved by organisms that
reproduce asexually.

but he was oppressed by the prospect that Darwin's theory would leave
Mind Moreover, they can "discern" design improvements along the way
that are all with an insufficiently important and originating role in the
(redesign of but "invisible" to asexually reproducing organisms ( Holland
1975 ). This organisms. So he set out to demonstrate that animals, by dint of
their own cannot be the raison d'etre of sex, however. Evolution cannot see
way down clever activities in the world, might hasten or guide the further
evolution of the road, so anything it builds must have an immediate payoff
to their species. Here is what he asked himself: how could it be that
individual counterbalance the cost. As recent theorists have insisted, the
"choice" of animals, by solving problems in their own lifetimes, could
change the reproducing sexually carries a huge immediate cost: organisms
send along conditions of competition for their own offspring, making those
problems only 50 percent of their genes in any one transaction (to say
nothing of the easier to solve in the future? And he came to realize that this
was in fact effort and risk involved in securing a transaction in the first
place). So the possible, under certain conditions, which we can illustrate

with a simple long-term payoff of heightened efficiency, acuity, and speed
of the redesign example (drawn, with revisions, from Dennett 1991a).

process—the features that make sex a magnificent crane—is as nothing to
the Consider a population of a species in which there is considerable
variation myopic, local competitions that must determine which organisms
get favored at birth in the way their brains are wired up. Just one of the
ways, we may in the very next generation. Some other, short-term, benefit
must have suppose, endows its possessor with a Good Trick—a behavioral
talent that maintained the positive selection pressure required to make
sexual protects it or enhances its chances dramatically. The standard way of
reproduction an offer few species could refuse. There are a variety of
representing such differences in fitness between individual members of a
compelling—and competing—hypotheses that might solve this puzzle,
which population is known as an "adaptive landscape" or a "fitness
landscape" (S.

was first forcefully posed for biologists by John Maynard Smith ( 1978).
For Wright 1931). The altitude in such a diagram stands for fitness (higher
is a lucid introduction to the current state of play, see Matt Ridley 1993-
(More better), and the longitude and latitude stand for some factors of
individual on this later.)

design—in this case, features of brain-wiring. Each different way a brain
What we learn from the example of sex is that a crane of great power may
might be wired is represented by one of the rods that compose the land-exist
that was not created in order to exploit that power, but for other reasons,
scape—each rod is a different genotype. The fact that just one of the com-
although its power as a crane may help explain why it has been maintained
binations of features is any good—that is, any better than run-of-the-mill—
is ever since. A crane that was obviously created to be a crane is genetic
illustrated by the way it stands out like a telephone pole in the desert.

engineering. Genetic engineers—human beings who engage in
recombinant-As figure 3.1 makes clear, only one wiring is favored; the
others, no matter DNA tinkering—can now unquestionably take huge leaps
through Design how "close" to being the good wiring, are about equal in

fitness. So such an Space, creating organisms that would never have
evolved by "ordinary"

isolated peak is indeed a needle in the haystack: it will be practically invis-
means. This is no miracle— provided that genetic engineers (and the
artifacts ible to natural selection. Those few individuals in the population
that are they use in their trade) are themselves wholly the products of lucky
enough to have the Good Trick genotype will typically have difficulty

78 UNIVERSAL ACID

The Tools for R and D: Skyhooks or Cranes? 79

FIGURE 3.1

FIGURE 3.2

a minimum, if not altogether out of the picture; all it requires is some brute,
passing it on to their offspring, since under most circumstances their
chances mechanical capacity to stop a random walk when a Good Thing
comes of finding a mate who also has the Good Trick genotype are remote,

and a along, a minimal capacity to "recognize" a tiny bit of progress, to
"learn"

miss is as good as a mile.

something by blind trial and error. In fact, I have put it in behavioristic But
now we introduce just one "minor" change: suppose that although the terms.
What Baldwin discovered was that creatures capable of "reinforce-
individual organisms start out with different wirings (whichever wiring was
ment learning" not only do better individually than creatures that are
entirely ordered by their particular genotype or genetic recipe)—as shown
by their

"hard-wired"; their species will evolve faster because of its greater capacity
scatter on the fitness landscape—they have some capacity to adjust or
revise to discover design improvements in the neighborhood.6 This is not
how their wiring, depending on what they encounter during their lifetimes.
(In the Baldwin described the effect he proposed. His temperament was the
farthest language of evolutionary theory, there is some "plasticity" in their
thing from behaviorism. As Richards notes:

phenotypes. The phenotype is the eventual body design created by the
genotype in interaction with environment. Identical twins raised in different
The mechanism conformed to ultra-Darwinian assumptions, but nonethe-
environments would share a genotype but might be dramatically different in
less allowed consciousness and intelligence a role in directing evolution.

phenotype.) Suppose, then, that these organisms can end up, after explo-By
philosophic disposition and conviction, Baldwin was a spiritualistic ration,
with a design different from the one they were born with. We may
metaphysician. He felt the beat of consciousness in the universe; it pulsed
suppose their explorations are random, but they have an innate capacity to
through all the levels of organic life. Yet he understood the power of
recognize (and stay with) a Good Trick when they stumble upon it. Then
mechanistic explanations of evolution. [R.J. Richards 1987, p. 480. ]7

those individuals who begin life with a genotype that is closer to the Good
Trick genotype—fewer redesign steps away from it—are more likely to

come The Baldwin Effect, under several different names, has been
variously across it, and stick with it, than those that are born with a faraway
design.

described, defended, and disallowed over the years, and recently indepen-
This head start in the race to redesign themselves can give them the edge
dently rediscovered several more times (e.g., Hinton and Nowland 1987).

in the Malthusian crunch—if the Good Trick is so good that those who
never learn it, or who learn it "too late," are at a severe disadvantage. In
populations with this sort of phenotypic plasticity, a near-miss is better than
a mile. For such a population, the telephone pole in the desert becomes the
6. Schull (1990), is responsible for the perspective that allows us to see
species as summit of a gradual hill, as in figure 32; those perched near the
summit, variably capable of "seeing" design improvements, thanks to their
variable capacities for phenotypic exploration (for commentary, see Dennett
1990a).

although they start out with a design that serves them no better than others,
will tend to discover the summit design in short order.

7. Robert Richards' account of the history of the Baldwin Effect (1987,
especially pp.

In the long run, natural selection—redesign at the genotype level—will
480-503 and discussion later in that book) has been one of the major
provocations and guides to my thinking in this book. What I found
particularly valuable (see my review, tend to follow the lead o/and confirm
the directions taken by the individual Dennett 1989a) was that Richards not
only shares with Baldwin and many other Dar-organisms' successful
explorations—redesign at the individual or phenotype winians a submerged
yearning for skyhooks—or at least a visceral dissatisfaction with level.

theories that insist on cranes—but also has the intellectual honesty and
courage to The way I have just described the Baldwin Effect certainly keeps
Mind to expose and examine his own discomfort with what he is obliged to
call "ultra-Darwinism."

Richards' heart is clearly with Baldwin, but his mind won't let him bluster,
or try to paper

°ver the cracks he sees in the dikes that others have tried to erect against
universal acid.

80 UNIVERSAL ACID

Who's Afraid of Reductionism? 81

Although it has been regularly described and acknowledged in biology
chemistry reduces to physics, that biology reduces to chemistry, that the
textbooks, it has typically been shunned by overcautious thinkers, because
social sciences reduce to biology, for instance. The problem is that there are
they thought it smacked of the Lamarckian heresy (the presumed possibility
both bland readings and preposterous readings of any such claim.
According of inheritance of acquired characteristics—see chapter 11 for a
detailed to the bland readings, it is possible (and desirable ) to unify
chemistry and discussion). This rejection is particularly ironic, since, as
Richards notes, it physics, biology and chemistry, and, yes, even the social
sciences and biol-was intended by Baldwin to be—and truly is—an
acceptable substitute for ogy. After all, societies are composed of human
beings, who, as mammals, Lamarckian mechanisms.

must fall under the principles of biology that cover all mammals. Mammals,
in turn, are composed of molecules, which must obey the laws of chemistry,
The principle certainly seemed to dispatch Lamarckism, while supplying
which in turn must answer to the regularities of the underlying physics. No
that positive factor in evolution for which even staunch Darwinists like sane
scientist disputes this bland reading; the assembled Justices of the Lloyd
Morgan longed. And to those of metaphysical appetite, it revealed Supreme
Court are as bound by the law of gravity as is any avalanche, that under the
clanking, mechanical vesture of Darwinian nature, mind because they are,
in the end, also a collection of physical objects. According could be found.
[R. J. Richards 1987, p. 487]

to the preposterous readings, reductionists want to abandon the principles,
Well, not Mind—if by that we mean a full-fledged, intrinsic, original,

theories, vocabulary, laws of the higher-level sciences, in favor of the
lower-skyhook-type Mind—but only a nifty mechanistic, behavioristic,
crane-style level terms. A reductionist dream, on such a preposterous
reading, might be mind. That is not nothing, however; Baldwin discovered
an effect that gen-to write "A Comparison of Keats and Shelley from the
Molecular Point of uinely increases the power—locally—of the underlying
process of natural View" or "The Role of Oxygen Atoms in Supply-Side
Economics," or "Ex-selection wherever it operates. It shows how the
"blind" process of the basic plaining the Decisions of the Rehnquist Court
in Terms of Entropy Fluctu-phenomenon of natural selection can be abetted
by a limited amount of ations." Probably nobody is a reductionist in the
preposterous sense, and

"look-ahead" in the activities of individual organisms, which create fitness
everybody should be a reductionist in the bland sense, so the "charge" of
differences that natural selection can then act upon. This is a welcome
reductionism is too vague to merit a response. If somebody says to you,
"But complication, a wrinkle in evolutionary theory that removes one
reasonable that's so reductionistic!" you would do well to respond, "That's
such a quaint, and compelling source of doubt, and enhances our vision of
the power of old-fashioned complaint! What on Earth did you have in
mind?"

Darwin's idea, especially when it is cascaded in multiple, nested
applications.

I am happy to say that in recent years, some of the thinkers I most admire
And it is typical of the outcome of other searches and controversies we will
have come out in defense of one or another version of reductionism, care-
explore: the motivation, the passion that drove the research, was the hope of
fully circumscribed. The cognitive scientist Douglas Hofstadter, in Godel
finding a skyhook; the triumph was finding how the same work could be
Escher Bach, composed a "Prelude ... Ant Fugue" (Hofstadter 1979, pp.
275-done with a crane.

336) that is an analytical hymn to the virtues of reductionism in its proper
place. George C. Williams, one of the pre-eminent evolutionists of the day,
published "A Defense of Reductionism in Evolutionary Biology" (1985).

The zoologist Richard Dawkins has distinguished what he calls hierarchical
5. WHO'S AFRAID OF REDUCTIONISM?

or gradual reductionism from precipice reductionism; he rejects only the
precipice version (Dawkins 1986b, p. 74 ).8 More recently the physicist
Reductionism is a dirty word, and a kind of 'holistier than thou' self-Steven
Weinberg, in Dreams of a Final Theory (1992), has written a chapter
righteousness has become fashionable.

entitled "Two Cheers for Reductionism," in which he distinguishes between

—RICHARD DAWKINS 1982, p. 113

uncompromising reductionism (a bad thing) and compromising
reductionism (which he ringingly endorses). Here is my own version. We
must distinguish The term that is most often bandied about in these
conflicts, typically as a reductionism, which is in general a good

term of abuse, is "reductionism." Those who yearn for skyhooks call those
who eagerly settle for cranes "reductionists," and they can often make
reductionism seem philistine and heartless, if not downright evil. But like

• See also his discussion of Lewontin, Rose, and Kamin's (1984 )
idiosyncratic version of most terms of abuse, "reductionism" has no fixed
meaning. The central reductionism—Dawkins aptly calls it their "private
bogey"—in the second edition of The image is of somebody claiming that
one science "reduces" to another: that Se!ftsh Gene (I989z\ p. 331.

82 UNIVERSAL ACID

Who's Afraid of Reductionism? 83

thing, from greedy reductionism, which is not. The difference, in the
context A more reasonable and realistic fear is that the greedy abuse of
Darwinian of Darwin's theory, is simple: greedy reductionists think that
everything can reasoning might lead us to deny the existence of real levels,
real complex-be explained without cranes; good reductionists think that

everything can be ities, real phenomena. By our own misguided efforts, we
might indeed come explained without skyhooks.

to discard or destroy something valuable. We must work hard to keep these
There is no reason to be compromising about what I call good reduc-two
fears separate, and we can begin by acknowledging the pressures that
tionism. It is simply the commitment to non-question-begging science with-
tend to distort the very description of the issues. For instance, there is a out
any cheating by embracing mysteries or miracles at the outset. (For strong
tendency among many who are uncomfortable with evolutionary another
perspective on this, see Dennett 1991a, pp. 33-39.) Three cheers for theory
to exaggerate the amount of disagreement among scientists ("It's just a that
brand of reductionism—and I'm sure Weinberg would agree. But in their
theory, and there are many reputable scientists who don't accept this"), and I
eagerness for a bargain, in their zeal to explain too much too fast, scientists
must try hard not to overstate the compensating case for what "science has
and philosophers often underestimate the complexities, trying to skip whole
shown." Along the way, we will encounter plenty of examples of genuine
layers or levels of theory in their rush to fasten everything securely and
ongoing scientific disagreement, and unsettled questions of fact. There is no
neatly to the foundation. That is the sin of greedy reductionism, but notice
reason for me to conceal or downplay these quandaries, for no matter how
that it is only when overzealousness leads to falsification of the phenomena
they come out, a certain amount of corrosive work has already been done
by that we should condemn it. In itself, the desire to reduce, to unite, to
explain Darwin's dangerous idea, and can never be undone.

it all in one big overarching theory, is no more to be condemned as immoral
We should be able to agree about one result already. Even if Darwin's than
the contrary urge that drove Baldwin to his discovery. It is not wrong to
relatively modest idea about the origin of species came to be rejected by
yearn for simple theories, or to yearn for phenomena that no simple (or
science—yes, utterly discredited and replaced by some vastly more
powerful complex!) theory could ever explain; what is wrong is zealous
(and currently unimaginable) vision—it would still have irremediably
sapped misrepresentation, in either direction.

conviction in any reflective defender of the tradition expressed by Locke. It
Darwin's dangerous idea is reductionism incarnate,9 promising to unite and
has done this by opening up new possibilities of imagination, and thus
utterly explain just about everything in one magnificent vision. Its being the
idea of destroying any illusions anyone might have had about the soundness
of an an algorithmic process makes it all the more powerful, since the
substrate argument such as Locke's a priori proof of the inconceivability of
Design neutrality it thereby possesses permits us to consider its application
to just without Mind. Before Darwin, this was inconceivable in the
pejorative sense about anything. It is no respecter of material boundaries. It
applies, as we that no one knew how to take the hypothesis seriously.
Proving it is another have already begun to see, even to itself. The most
common fear about matter, but the evidence does in fact mount, and we
certainly can and must Darwin's idea is that it will not just explain but
explain away the Minds and take it seriously. So whatever else you may
think of Locke's argument, it is Purposes and Meanings that we all hold
dear. People fear that once this now as obsolete as the quill pen with which
it was written, a fascinating universal acid has passed through the
monuments we cherish, they will cease museum piece, a curiosity that can
do no real work in the intellectual world to exist, dissolved in an
unrecognizable and unlovable puddle of scientistic today.

destruction. This cannot be a sound fear; a proper reductionists explanation
of these phenomena would leave them still standing but just demystified,
unified, placed on more secure foundations. We might learn some surprising
CHAPTER 3: Darwin's dangerous idea is that Design can emerge from
mere or even shocking things about these treasures, but unless our valuing
these Order via an algorithmic process that makes no use of pre-existing
Mind.

things was based all along on confusion or mistaken identity, how could
Skeptics have hoped to show that at least somewhere in this process, a
increased understanding of them diminish their value in helping hand (more
accurately, a helping Mind) must have been provided— a

-.10

skyhook to do some of the lifting. In their attempts to prove a role for our
eyes?

skyhooks, they have often discovered cranes: products of earlier
algorithmic processes that can amplify the power of the basic Darwinian
algorithm, making the process locally swifter and more efficient in a
nonmiraculous way. Good reductionists suppose that all Design can be
explained without 9. Yes, incarnate. Think about it: would we want to say it
was reductionism in spirit?

skyhooks; greedy reductionists suppose it can all be explained without 10.
Everybody knows how to answer this rhetorical question with another: "Are
you so cranes.

in love with Truth at all costs that you would want to know if your lover
were unfaithful to you?" We are back where we started. I for one answer
that I love the world so much that I am sure I want to know the truth about
it.

84 UNIVERSAL ACID

CHAPTER 4: How did die historical process of evolution actually make the
Tree of Life? In order to understand the controversies about the power of
natural selection to explain the origins of all the Design, we must hrst learn
CHAPTER FOUR

how to visualize the Tree of Life, getting clear about some easily
misunderstood features of its shape, and a few of the key moments in its
history.

The Tree of Life

1. How SHOULD WE VISUALIZE THE TREE OF LIFE?

Extinction has only separated groups: it has by no means made them; for if
every form which has ever lived on this earth were suddenly to reappear,
though it would be quite impossible to give definitions by which each group
could be distinguished from other groups, as all would blend together by

steps as fine as those between the finest existing varieties, nevertheless a
natural classification, or at least a natural arrangement, would be possible.

—CHARLES DARWIN, Origin, p. 432

In the previous chapter, the idea of R-and-D work as analogous to moving
around in something I called Design Space was introduced on the fly,
without proper attention to detail or a definition of terms. In order to sketch
the big picture, I helped myself to several controversial claims, promising to
defend them later. Since the idea of Design Space is going to be put to
heavy use, I must now secure it, and, following Darwin's lead, I will once
more begin in the middle, by looking first at some actual patterns in some
relatively well-explored spaces. These will serve as guides, in the next
chapter, to a more general perspective on possible patterns, and the way in
which certain sorts of processes bring possibilities into reality.

Consider the Tree of Life, the graph that plots the time-line trajectories of
all the things that have ever lived on this planet—or, in other words, the
total fan-out of offspring. The rules for drawing the graph are simple. An
organism's time line begins when it is born and stops when it dies, and
either there are offspring lines emanating from it or there aren't. The close-
up view of an organism's offspring lines—if there are any—would vary in
appearance depending on several facts: whether the organism reproduces by
fission or budding, or giving birth to eggs or live young, and whether the

86 THE TREE OF LIFE

How Should We Visualize the Tree of Life? 87

parent organism survives to coexist for a while with its offspring. But such
lier on top and later on the bottom, in which case our diagram shows
microdetails of the fan-out will not in general concern us at this time. There
ancestors and their descendants. Darwin used this convention when he
spoke is no serious controversy about the fact that all the diversity of life
that has of speciation as modification with descent, and of course in the title
of his ever existed on this planet is derived from this single fan-out; the
contro-work on human evolution, The Descent of Man, and Selection in
Relation to versies arise about how to discover and describe in general
terms the various Sex (1871). Alternatively, we can draw a tree in normal
orientation, so it forces, principles, constraints, etc., that permit us to give a
scientific looks like a tree, on which the later "descendants" compose die
limbs and explanation of the patterns in all this diversity.

branches that rise, over time, from the trunk and the initial roots. Darwin
also The Earth is about 4.5 billion years old, and the first life forms
appeared exploited this convention—for instance, in the only diagram in

Origin—but quite "soon"; the simplest single-celled organisms—the
prokaryotes—ap-also, along with everyone else, in uses of expressions that
align higher with peared at least 35 billion years ago, and for probably
another 2 billion years, later. Both metaphor groups coexist with little
turbulence in the language that was all the life there was. bacteria, blue-
green algae, and their equally and diagrams of biology today. (This
tolerance for topsy-turvy imagery is not simple kin. Then, about 1.4 billion
years ago, a major revolution happened: restricted to biology. "Family
trees" are more often than not drawn with the some of these simplest life
forms literally joined forces, when some bacteria-ancestors at the top, and
generative linguists, among others, draw their like prokaryotes invaded the
membranes of other prokaryotes, creating the derivational trees upside
down, with the "root" at the top of the page.) Since I have already proposed
labeling the vertical dimension in Design eukaryotes—cells with nuclei and
other specialized internal bodies (Mar-Space as a measure of amount of
Design, so that higher = more designed, we gulis 1981). These internal
bodies, called organelles or plastids, are the key must be careful to note that
in the Tree of Life (drawn right-side-up, as I design innovation opening up
the regions of Design Space inhabited today.

propose to do ) higher = later (and nothing else ). It does not necessarily
The chloroplasts in plants are responsible for photosynthesis, and mito-
mean more designed. What is the relation between time and Design, or what
chondria, which are to be found in every cell of every plant, animal, could it
be? Could things that are more designed come first and fungus—every
organism with nucleated cells—are the fundamental oxygen-processing
energy-factories that permit us all to fend off the Second Law of
Thermodynamics by exploiting the materials and energy around us. The
prefix "eu" in Greek means "good," and from our point of view the
eukaryotes were certainly an improvement, since, thanks to their internal
complexity, they could specialize, and this eventually made possible the
creation of multicelled organisms, such as ourselves.

That second revolution—the emergence of the first multicelled organisms—
had to wait 700 million years or so. Once multicelled organisms were on the
scene, the pace picked up. The subsequent fan-out of plants and animals—
from ferns and flowers to insects, reptiles, birds, and mammals—

has populated the world today with millions of different species. In the
process, millions of other species have come and gone. Surely many more
species have gone extinct than now exist—perhaps a hundred extinct spe-
cies for every existent species.

What is the overall shape of this huge Tree of Life spreading its branches
through 35 billion years? What would it look like if we could see it all at
once from a God's-eye view, with all of time spread out before us in a
spatial dimension? The usual practice in scientific graphing is to plot time
on the horizontal axis, with earlier to the left and later to the right, but
evolutionary diagrams have always been the exception, usually plotting
time on the vertical dimension. Even more curiously, we have accustomed
ourselves to two opposite conventions for labeling the vertical dimension,
and with these conventions have come their associated metaphors. We can
put ear-

88 THE TREE OF LIFE

How Should We Visualize the Tree of Life? 89

gradually lose Design? Is there a possible world in which bacteria are the?

time—we would see billions upon billions of individual unicellular organ-
descendants of mammals and not vice versa? These questions about possi-
isms, a fraction of which would have trails leading to progeny slightly
higher bility will be easier to answer if we first look a bit more closely at
what has up the trunk. (In those early days, reproduction was by budding or
fission; actually happened on our planet. So let us be clear that for the time
being, the somewhat later, a kind of unicellular sex evolved, but pollen-
wafting and vertical dimension in the diagrams below stands for time, and
time alone, egg-laying and the other phenomena of our kind of sexual
reproduction have with early at the bottom and late at the top. Following
standard practice, the to wait for the multicellular revolution in the fronds.)
There would be some left-right dimension is taken as a sort of single-plane
summary of diversity.

diversity, and some revision of design over time, so perhaps the whole trunk
Each individual organism has to have its time line, distinct from all others,
should be shown leaning left or right, or spreading more than I have shown.

so, even if two organisms are exact atom-for-atom duplicates of each other,
Is it just our ignorance that prevents us from differentiating this "trunk" of
they will have to appear side by side at best. How we line them all up,
unicellular varieties into salient streams? Perhaps it should be shown with
however, can be according to some measure or family of measures of
various dead-end branches large enough to be visible, as in figure 4.2,
difference in individual body shape— morphology, to use the technical
term.

marking various hundred-million-year experiments in alternative unicellular
So, to return to our question, what would the overall shape of the entire
design that eventually all ended in extinction.

Tree of Life look like, if we could take it all in at a glance? Wouldn't it look
rather like a palm tree, as in figure 4.1?

This is the first of many trees, or dendrograms, we will consider, and of
course the limited resolution of the ink on the page blurs quadrillions of
separate lines together. I have left the "root" of the tree deliberately fuzzy
and indistinct for the time being. We are still exploring the middle, saving
the ultimate beginnings for a later chapter. If we were to zoom in on the
trunk of this tree and look at any cross-section of it—an "instant" in
EARTH FORMED -------------------------------------------------------------------
-

FIGURE 4.3

There must have been billions of failed design experiments, but perhaps
none ever became very distant departures from a single unicellular norm. In
any event, if we were to zoom way in on the trunk, we would see a
luxuriant growth of short-lived alternatives, as in figure 4.3, all but invisible
against the norm of conservative replication. How can we be sure of this?
Because, as we shall see, the odds are heavily against any mutation's being
more viable than the theme on which it is a variation.

90 THE TREE OF LIFE

Color-coding a Species on the Tree 91

Until sexual reproduction is invented, almost all the branches we observe,
also contain mitochondria, and these always come from one parent only, the
at any zoom level, diverge. The exceptions are remarkable, however. At the
female. (If you are a male, all the mitochondria in your cells are in an time
of the eukaryotic revolution, if we look in just the right place, we will
evolutionary cul-de-sac; they will not get passed on to any offspring of
yours, see a bacterium entering the rudimentary body of some other
prokaryote to who will get all their mitochondria from their mother.) Now
step back a pace create the first eukaryote. Its progeny all have a dual
inheritance—they from our close-up of matings-with-offspring and notice
(in figure 4.4) that contain two entirely independent DNA sequences, one
for the host cell and most of those offspring's trajectories terminate without
mating, or at least another for the "parasite," sharing its fate with its host's,
and linking the fate without offspring of their own. This is the Malthusian
crunch. Everywhere of all its descendants (now on their way to becoming
benign resident we look, the branches and twigs are covered with the short,
terminal fuzz of mitochondria) to the fate of the cells they will inhabit, the
descendants of the birth-death without further issue.

cell first invaded. It's an amazing feature of the microscopic geometry of the
It would be impossible to see at one time all the branch points and Tree of
Life: whole lineages of mitochondria, tiny living things in their own
junctions in the whole Tree of Life, extending over 3.5 billion years, but if
right, with their own DNA, living their entire lives within the walls of the
we backed way off from the details and looked for some large-scale shapes,
cells of larger organisms that compose other lineages. In principle it only
has we could recognize a few familiar landmarks. Early in the multicellular
fan-to have happened once, but we may suppose that many experiments in
such out that began about 700 million years ago, we could see the forks that
radical symbiosis occurred (Margulis 1981; for accessible summaries, see
created two large branches—the kingdoms of plants and animals—and an-
Margulis and Sagan 1986, 1987).

other for the fungi, departing from the trunk of the single-celled organisms.

Once sexual reproduction becomes established many millions of years And
if we looked closely, we would see that, once they become separated by
later, up in the fronds of our Tree (and sex has apparently evolved many
some distance, no matings reunite any of the trajectories of their individual
times, though there is disagreement on this score ), if we zoom in and look
members. By this time, the groups had become reproductively isolated, and
closely at the trajectories of individual organisms, we find a different sort of
the gap grew wider and wider.1 Further forks created the multicellular
phyla, juncture between individuals—matings—with starbursts of offspring
result-orders, classes, families, genera, and species.

ing. Zooming in and "looking through the microscope," we can see in figure
4.4 that, unlike the coming together that created eukaryotes, in which both
DNA sequences are preserved whole and kept distinct within the bodies of
2. COLOR-CODING A SPECIES ON THE TREE

the progeny, in sexual matings each offspring gets its own unique DNA
sequence, knit together by a process that draws 50 percent from one parent's
What does a species look like in this Tree? Since the questions of what a
DNA and 50 percent from the other's. Of course each offspring's cells
species is, and how a species starts, continue to generate controversy, we
can take advantage of the God's-eye perspective we have temporarily

adopted to look closely at the whole Tree of Life and see what would
happen if we tried to color-code a single species in it. One thing can be
sure: whatever region we color in will be a single, connected region. No
separated blobs of organisms, no matter how similar in appearance or
morphology, could count as composed of members of a single species,
which must be united by descent. The next point to make is that until sexual
reproduction arrives on the scene, the hallmark of reproductive isolation can
have no bearing at all.

This handy boundary-making condition has no definition in the asexual
world. In those ancient and contemporary strands in the Tree 1. There have
been some remarkable symbiotic reunions, however, of organisms that
belong to different kingdoms. The flatworm Convoluta roscoffensis has no
mouth and never needs to eat, since it is filled with algae that
photosynthesize its nourishment FIGURE 4.4

(Margulis and Sagan 1986)!

92 THE TREE OF LIFE

Color-coding a Species on the Tree 93

that reproduce asexually, groupings of one sort or another may interest us
for various good reasons—groupings of shared morphology or behavior or
of genetic similarity, for instance—and we might choose to call the
resulting group a species, but there may very well be no theoretically
important sharp edges that would delimit such a species. So let us
concentrate on sexually reproducing species, all of which are to be found up
in the multicellular fronds of the Tree. How might we go about coloring all
the life-lines of a single such species red? We could start by looking at

individuals at random until we found one with lots of descendants. Call her
Lulu, and color her red.

(Red is represented by the thick lines in figure 4.5.) Now move stepwise up
the Tree, coloring all Lulu's descendants red; these will all be members of
one species unless we find our red ink spreading into two distinct higher
branches, none of whose members form junctions across the void. If that
happens, we know there has been speciation, and we will have to back up
and make several decisions. We must first choose whether to keep one of
the branches red (the "parent" species continues red and the other branch is
considered the new daughter species ) or to stop the red ink altogether as
soon as the branching happens (the "parent" species has gone extinct,
fissioning into two daughter species).

If the organisms in the branch on the left are all pretty much the same in
appearance, equipment, and habits as Lulu's contemporaries, while the
organisms in the right branch almost all sport novel horns, or webbed feet,
or stripes, then it is pretty obvious that we should label the left branch as the
continuing, parent species, and the right branch the new offshoot. If both
branches soon show major changes, our color-coding decision is not so
FIGURE 4.5

obvious. There are no secret facts that could tell us which choice is right,
which choice carves nature at the joints, for we are looking right at the
places where the joints would have to be, and there aren't any. There is
nothing The same sort of quandary faces us when we try to complete the
task of more to being a species than being one of these branches of
interbreeding color-coding the whole species by carrying our red ink down
the Tree to organisms, and nothing more to being the conspecific of some
other organism include all Lulu's ancestors. We will encounter no gaps or
joints on this (contemporary or not) than being part of the same branch. The
choice we downward path, which will take us all the way to the prokaryotes
at the base make will then have to depend on pragmatic or aesthetic
considerations: Is it of the Tree if we persist. But if we also color sideways
as we go down, filling ungainly to keep the same label for this branch as for
its parent trunk? Would in the cousins, aunts, and uncles of Lulu and her
ancestors, and then color up it be misleading for one reason or another to

say the branch on the right from these sideways spreaders, we will
eventually fill in a whole branch on rather than the branch on the left was
the new species?2

which Lulu resides down to the point where coloring any lower ( earlier )
nodes (for instance, at A in figure 4.6) causes "leakage" of red into
neighboring branches that clearly belong to other species.

If we stop there, we can be sure that only members of Lulu's species have
been colored red. It will be arguable that we have left out some that deserve
2. The cladists (whose views will be briefly discussed later) are a school of
taxonomists to be colored, but only arguable, for there are, again, no hidden
facts, no that reject, for various reasons, the concept of a "parent" species'
persisting. Every essences that could settle the issue. As Darwin pointed
out, if it weren't for speciation event, in their terms, results in a pair of
daughter species and the extinction the separations that time and the
extinction of the intermediate stepping-of their common parent, no matter
how closely one surviving branch resembles the parent, compared with the
other branch.

stones has created, although we could put the life forms into a "natural

94 THE TREE OF LIFE

Colorcoding a Species on the Tree 95

lated. Where should we draw the line? Darwin shows that we don't need to
draw the line in an essentialist way in order to get on with our science. We
have the best of reasons to realize that these extremes are improbable: in
general, where there is genetic speciation there is marked morphological
difference, or marked difference in geographical distribution, or (most
likely) both. If this generalization weren't largely true, the concept of
species would not be important, but we need not ask exactly how much

difference (in addition to reproductive isolation) is essential for a case of
real species-difference.3

Darwin shows us that questions like "What is the difference between a
variety and a species?" are like the question "What is the difference
between a peninsula and an island?"4 Suppose you see an island half a mile
offshore at high tide. If you can walk to it at low tide without getting your
feet wet, is it still an island? If you build a bridge to it, does it cease to be an
island?

What if you build a solid causeway? If you cut a canal across a peninsula
(like the Cape Cod Canal), do you turn it into an island? What if a hurricane
does the excavation work? This sort of inquiry is familiar to philosophers. It
is the Socratic activity of definition-mongering or essence-hunting: looking
for the "necessary and sufficient conditions" for being-an-X. Sometimes
almost everyone can see the pointlessness of the quest—islands obviously
don't have real essences, but only nominal essences at best. But at other
times there can still seem to be a serious scientific question that needs
answering.

More than a century after Darwin, there are still serious debates among
biologists (and even more so among philosophers of biology ) about how to
define species. Shouldn't scientists define their terms? Yes, of course, but
FIGURE 4.6

only up to a point. It turns out that there are different species concepts with
different uses in biology—what works for paleontologists is not much use
to arrangement" (of descent), we could not put them into a "natural classifi-
ecologists, for instance—and no clean way of uniting them or putting them
cation"—we need the biggish gaps between extant forms to form the in an
order of importance that would crown one of them (the most important

"boundaries" of any such classes.

one) as the concept of species. So I am inclined to interpret the persisting
The theoretical concept of species that predates Darwin's theory had two
debates as more a matter of vestigial Aristotelian tidiness than a useful

fundamental ideas: that species members have different essences, and that
disciplinary trait. (This is all controversial, but see Kitcher 1984 and G. C.

"therefore" they don't/can't interbreed. What we have subsequently figured
Williams 1992 for further support and concurring arguments, and the recent
out is that in principle there could be two subpopulations that were different
anthology on the topic, Ereshefsky 1992, and Sterelny 1994, an insightful
only in that their pairings were sterile due to a tiny genetic incompatibility.

review essay on that anthology.)

Would these be different species? They could look alike, feed alike, live
together in the same niche, and be genetically very, very similar, yet
reproductively isolated. They would not be different enough to count as
salient varieties, but they would satisfy the primary condition for being two
3. The issues are further complicated by the existence of hybridization—in
which mem-different species. In fact, there are cases of "cryptic sibling
species" that bers of two different species do have fertile offspring—a
phenomenon that raises inter-approximate this extreme. As we already
noted, at the other extreme we have esting issues that are off the track we
are exploring.

the dogs, readily distinguished into morphological types by the naked eye,
4. The evolutionary epistemologist and psychologist Donald Campbell has
been the most adapted to vastly different environments, but not
reproductively iso-vigorous developer of the implications of this side of
Darwin's legacy.

96 THE TREE OF LIFE

Retrospective Coronations 97

saliencies—weddings, rings, certificates—by which it can be observed. We
3. RETROSPECTIVE CORONATIONS: MITOCHONDRIAL EVE AND

can see this feature of speciation in a better light by looking first at another
INVISIBLE BEGINNINGS

instance of retrospective crowning, the conferring of the title of
Mitochondrial Eve.

When we tried to see whether Lulu's descendants split into more than one
Mitochondrial Eve is the woman who is the most recent direct ancestor, in
species, we had to look ahead to see if any large branches appeared, and
then the female line, of every human being alive today. People have a hard
time back up if we deemed that somewhere along the line a speciation event
must thinking about this individual woman, so let's just review the
reasoning.

have happened. We never addressed the presumably important question of
Consider the set A, of all human beings alive today. Each was born of one
exactly when speciation should be said to occur. Speciation can now be seen
and only one mother, so consider next the set, B, of all the mothers of those
to be a phenomenon in nature that has a curious property: you can't tell that
it alive today. B is of necessity smaller than A, since no one has more than
one is occurring at the time it occurs! You can only tell much later that it
has mother, and some mothers have more than one child. Continue with the
set occurred, retrospectively crowning an event when you discover that its
C, of mothers of all those mothers in set B. It is smaller still. Continue on
sequels have a certain property. This is not a point about our epistemic with
sets D and E and so forth. The sets must contract as we go back each
limitations—as if we would be able to tell when speciation occurs if only
we generation. Notice that as we move back through the years, we exclude
many had better microscopes, or even if we could get in a time machine and
go women who were contemporaries of those in our set. Among these
excluded back in time to observe the appropriate moments. This is a point
about the women are those who either lived and died childless or whose
female objective property of being a speciation event. It is not a property
that an progeny did. Eventually, this set must funnel down to one— the
woman who event has simply by virtue of its spatio-temporally local
properties.

is the closest direct female ancestor of everybody alive on earth today. She
is Other concepts exhibit similar curiosities. I once read about a comically
Mitochondrial Eve, so named (by Cann et al. 1987) because since the bad

historical novel in which a French doctor came home to supper one
mitochondria in our cells are passed through the maternal line alone, all the
evening in 1802 and said to his wife-. "Guess what / did today! I assisted at
mitochondria in all the cells in all the people alive today are direct the birth
of Victor Hugo!" What is wrong with that story? Or consider the
descendants of the mitochondria in her cells!

property of being a widow. A woman in New York City may suddenly The
same logical argument establishes that there is—must be—an Adam acquire
that property by virtue of the effects that a bullet has just had on some as
well: the closest direct male ancestor of everybody alive today. We could
man's brain in Dodge City, over a thousand miles away. (In the days of the
call him F-Chromosome Adam, since all our F-chromosomes pass down
Wild West, there was a revolver nicknamed the Widowmaker. Whether a
through the paternal line just the way our mitochondria pass through the
particular revolver lived up to its nickname on a particular occasion might
be maternal line.5 Was F-Chromosome Adam the husband or lover of Mito-
a fact that could not be settled by any spatio-temporally local examination
of chondrial Eve? Almost certainly not. There is only a tiny probability that
its effects.) This case gets its curious capacity to leap through space and
time these two individuals were alive at the same time. (Paternity being a
much from the conventional nature of the relation of marriage, in which a
past less time-and-energy-consuming business than maternity, what is
logically historical event, a wedding, is deemed to create a permanent
relation— a possible is that F-Chromosome Adam lived very recently, and
was very, very formal relation—of interest in spite of subsequent
wanderings and concrete busy in the bedroom—leaving Errol Flynn in his,
um, dust. He could, in misfortunes (the accidental loss of a ring, or the
destruction of the marriage principle, be the great-grandfather of us all. This
is about as unlikely as the certificate, for instance.)

case in which F-Chromosome Adam and Mitochondrial Eve were a couple.)
The systematicity of genetic reproduction is not conventional but natural,
Mitochondrial Eve has been in the news recently because the scientists but
that very systematicity permits us to think formally about causal chains who
christened her think they can analyze the patterns in the mitochondrial
extending over millions of years, causal chains that would otherwise be

virtually impossible to designate or refer to or track. This permits us to
become interested in, and reason rigorously about, even more distant and
locally invisible relationships than the formal relationship of marriage. Spe-
5. Note one important difference between the legacies of Mitochondrial Eve
and Yciation is, like marriage, a concept anchored within a tight, formally
defin-Chromosome Adam: we all, male and female, have mitochondria in
our cells, but they able system of thought, but, unlike marriage, it has no
conventional all come from our mothers; if you are male, you have a V-
chromosome and got it from your father, but most—virtually all, but not
quite all—females have no Y-chromosome at all.

98 THE TREE OF LIFE

Retrospective Coronations 99

DNA of the different people alive today and deduce from that how recently
existed! If Amy's granddaughters had all starved to death in infancy—as so
Mitochondrial Eve lived, and even where she lived. According to their
many infants did in those days—the same oblivion would be ours.

original calculations, Mitochondrial Eve lived in Africa, very, very recently
—

The curious invisibility of the crown of Mitochondrial Eve in her own less
than three hundred thousand years ago, and maybe less than half that.

lifetime is easier to understand and accept than the near-invisibility of what
These methods of analysis are controversial, however, and the African Eve
every species must have: a beginning. If species aren't eternal, then all of
hypothesis may be fatally flawed. Deducing where and when is a far trickier
time can be divided, somehow, into the times before the existence of
species task than deducing that there was a Mitochondrial Eve, something
that x, and all subsequent times. But what must have happened at the
interface? It nobody denies. Consider a few of the things we already know
about Mito-may help if we think of a similar puzzle that has baffled many
people. Have chondrial Eve, setting aside the recent controversies. We
know that she had you ever wondered, when hearing a new joke, where it
came from? If you are at least two daughters who had surviving children.

(If she had just one like almost everybody else I have ever known or heard
of, you never make up daughter, her daughter would wear the crown of
Mitochondrial Eve.) To jokes; you pass on, perhaps with "improvements,"
something you heard from distinguish her title from her proper name, let's
call her Amy. Amy bears the someone who heard it from someone, who...
Now, we know the process title of Mitochondrial Eve; that is, she just
happens to have been the maternal cannot go on forever. A joke about
President Clinton, for instance, cannot be founder of today's line of people.6
It is important to remind ourselves that in more than a year or so old. So
who makes up the jokes? Joke-authors (as all other regards, there was
probably nothing remarkable or special about contrasted with joke-
purveyors) are invisible.7 Nobody ever seems to catch Mitochondrial Eve;
she was certainly not the First Woman, or the founder of them in the act of
authorship. There is even folklore—an "urban legend"—to the species
Homo sapiens. Many earlier women were unquestionably of our the effect
that these jokes are all created in prison, by prisoners, those species, but
happen not to have any direct female lines of descendants dangerous and
unnatural folks, so unlike the rest of us, and with nothing leading to people
living today. It is also true that Mitochondrial Eve was better to do with
their time than to fashion jokes in their secret underground probably no
stronger, faster, more beautiful, or more fecund than the other joke-
workshops. Nonsense. It is hard to believe— but it must be true—that
women of her day.

the jokes we hear and pass on have evolved from earlier stories, picking up
To bring out just how unspecial Mitochondrial Eve—that is, Amy—prob-
revisions and updates as they are passed along. A joke typically has no one
ably was, suppose that tomorrow, thousands of generations later, a virulent
author; its authorship is distributed over dozens or hundreds or thousands of
new virus were to spread around the Earth, wiping out 99 percent of the
tellers, solidifying for a while in some particularly topical and currently
human race in a few years. The survivors, fortunate to have some innate
amusing version, before going dormant, like the ancestors from which it
resistance to the virus, would probably all be quite closely related. Their
grew. Speciation is equally hard to witness, and for the same reason.

closest common direct female ancestor—call her Betty—would be some
When has speciation occurred? In many cases (perhaps most, perhaps
woman who lived hundreds or thousands of generations later than Amy, and
almost all—biologists disagree about how important the exceptions are), the
the crown of Mitochondrial Eve would pass to her, retroactively. She may
speciation depends on a geographical split in which a small group— maybe
a have been the source of the mutation that centuries later came into its own
as single mating pair—wander off and start a lineage that becomes a
species-saver, but it didn't do her any good, since the virus against which it
reproductively isolated. This is allopatric speciation, in contrast to sym-is to
triumph didn't exist then. The point is that Mitochondrial Eve can only
patric speciation, which does not involve any geographic barriers. Suppose
be retrospectively crowned. This historically pivotal role is determined not
we watch the departure and resettlement of the founding group. Time
passes, just by the accidents of Amy's own time, but by the accidents of later
times and several generations come and go. Has speciation occurred? Not
yet, as well. Talk about massive contingency! If Amy's uncle hadn't saved
her certainly. We won't know until many generations later whether or not
these from drowning when she was three, none of us (with our particular
individuals should be crowned as species-initiators.

mitochondrial DNA, thanks ultimately to Amy) would ever have There is
not and could not be anything internal or intrinsic to the individuals—or
even to the individuals-as-they-fit-into-their-environment—from 6.
Philosophers have often discussed strange examples of individuals known
to us only via definite descriptions, but they have usually coniined their
attention to such boring—if 7. There are, of course, the writers who make
their living writing funny lines for televi-real—individuals as the shortest
spy. (There has to be one, doesn't there?) I suggest that sion comedians, and
the comedians themselves, who create much of their own material,
Mitochondrial Eve is a much more delicious example, all the more so for
being of some but, with negligible exceptions, these people are not the
creators of the joke stories genuine theoretical interest in evolutionary
biology.

("Did you hear the one about the guy who...?") that get passed around.

100 THE TREE OF LIFE

Patterns, Oversimplification, and Explanation 101

which it followed that they were—as they later turn out to be—the founders
trends, forces, principles—or historical events—have influenced these of a
new species. We can imagine, if we want, an extreme (and improbable)
shapes or made them possible? Eyes have evolved independently in dozens
case in which a single mutation guarantees reproductive isolation in a single
of lineages, but feathers probably only once. As John Maynard Smith ob-
generation, but, of course, whether or not the individual who has that
serves, mammals go in for horns but birds do not. "Why should the pattern
mutation counts as a species-founder or simply as a freak of nature depends
of variation be limited in this way? The short answer is that we do not
know"

on nothing in its individual makeup or biography, but on what happens to
(Maynard Smith 1986, p. 41).

subsequent generations—if any—of its offspring.

We can't rewind the tope of life and replay it to see what happens next
Darwin was not able to present a single instance of speciation by natural
time, alas, so the only way to answer questions about such huge and ex-
selection in Origin of Species. His strategy in that book was to develop in
perimentally inaccessible patterns is to leap boldly into the void with the
detail the evidence that artificial selection by dog- and pigeon-breeders
could risky tactic of deliberate oversimplification. This tactic has a long and
dis-build up large differences by a series of gradual changes. He then
pointed out tinguished history in science, but it tends to provoke
controversy, since that deliberate choice by title animals' keepers was
inessential; the runts of scientists have different thresholds at which they get
nervous about playing the litter tended not to be valued, and hence tended
not to reproduce as much fast and loose with the recalcitrant details.
Newtonian physics was overas their more valued siblings, so, without any
conscious policy of breeding, thrown by Einstein, but it is still a good
approximation for almost all pur-human animal-keepers presided
unwittingly over a steady process of design poses. No physicist objects

when NASA uses Newtonian physics to calculate revision. He offered the
nice example of the King Charles spaniel, "which the forces at liftoff and
the orbital trajectory of the space shuttle, but, strictly has been
unconsciously modified to a large extent since the time of that speaking,
this is a deliberate use of a false theory in order to make calculation
monarch" (Origin, p. 35)—as can be confirmed by a careful examination of
feasible. In the same spirit, physiologists studying, say, mechanisms for the
dogs in various portraits of King Charles. He called such cases changing the
rate of metabolism try in general to avoid the bizarre com-

"unconscious selection" by human domesticators, and he used it as a
plexities of subatomic quantum physics, hoping that any quantum effects
will persuasive bridge to get his readers to the hypothesis of even more
cancel out or in other ways be beneath the threshold of their models. In
unconscious selection by the impersonal environment. But he had to admit,
general, the tactic pays off handsomely, but one can never be sure when one
when challenged, that he could provide no cases of animal-breeders'

scientist's grubby complication will be elevated into another scientist's Key
to producing a new species. Such breeding had definitely produced different
the Mystery. And it can just as well work the other way around: the Key is
varieties, but not a single new species. Dachshund and St. Bernard were not
often discovered by climbing out of the trenches and going for the
panoramic different species, however different in appearance. Darwin
admitted as much, view.

but he might quite correctly have gone on to point out that it was simply too
I once got in a debate with Francis Crick about the virtues and vices of early
to tell whether he had given any examples of speciation accomplished
Connectionism—the movement in cognitive science that models psycho-by
artificial selection. Any lady's lapdog could at some future date be logical
phenomena by building up patterns in the connection-strengths discovered
to have been the founding member of a species that split off from between
the nodes in very unrealistic and oversimplified "neural nets" sim-Canis
familiaris.

ulated on computers. "These people may be good engineers," Crick averred
The same moral applies to the creation of new genera, families, and even

(as best I recall), "but what they are doing is terrible science! These people
kingdoms, of course. The major branching that we would retrospectively
willfully turn their backs on what we already know about how neurons
crown as the parting of the plants from the animals began as a segregation
of interact, so their models are utterly useless as models of brain function."
This two gene pools every bit as inscrutable and unremarkable at the time
as any criticism somewhat surprised me, for Crick is famous for his own
brilliant other temporary drifting apart of members of a single population.

opportunism in uncovering the structure of DNA; while others struggled up
the straight and narrow path of strict construction from the evidence, he and
Watson took a few daring and optimistic sidesteps, with gratifying results.

4. PATTERNS, OVERSIMPLIFICATION, AND EXPLANATION

But in any case, I was curious to know how widely he would cast his
denunciation. Would he say the same thing about population geneticists?
The Much more interesting than the question of how to draw the species
bound-derogatory term for some of their models is "bean-bag genetics," for
they ary are all the questions about the shapes of the branches—and even
more pretend that genes for this and that are like so many color-coded beads
on a interesting, the shapes of the empty spaces between the branches. What
string. What they call a gene (or an allele at a locus) 102 THE TREE OF
LIFE

Patterns, Oversimplification, and Explanation 103

bears only a passing resemblance to the intricate machinery of the codon
even have necks. So that's how come giraffes have long necks. End of ex-
sequences on DNA molecules. But thanks to these deliberate
simplifications, planation. (And if that doesn't satisfy you, note that you will
be even less their models are computationally tractable, enabling them to
discover and satisfied if the answer throws in all the details about the
individual devel-confirm many large-scale patterns in gene flow that would
otherwise be opmental and nutritional history of each giraffe in the lineage.)
utterly invisible. Adding complications would tend to bring their research to
Any acceptable explanation of the patterns we observe in the Tree of Life a
grinding halt. But is their research good science? Crick replied that he had

must be contrastive: why do we see this actual pattern rattier than that one
—

himself thought about the comparison, and had to say that population or no
pattern at all? What are the nonactualized alternatives that need to be
genetics wasn't science either!

considered, and how are they organized? To answer such questions, we
need My tastes in science are more indulgent, as perhaps you would expect
to be able to talk about what is possible in addition to what is actual.

from a philosopher, but I do have my reasons: I think the case is strong that
not only do "over"-simplified models often actually explain just what needs
explaining, but no more complicated model could do the job. When what
CHAPTER 4: There are patterns in the unimaginably detailed Tree of Life,
provokes our curiosity are the large patterns in phenomena, we need an
highlighting crucial events that made the later flourishing of the Tree pos-
explanation at the right level. In many instances this is obvious. If you want
sible. The eukaryotic revolution and the multicellular revolution are the
most to know why traffic jams tend to happen at a certain hour every day,
you will important, followed by the speciation events, invisible at the time,
but later still be baffled after you have painstakingly reconstructed the
steering, brak-seen to mark even such major divisions as those between
plants and animals.

ing, and accelerating processes of the thousands of drivers whose various If
science is to explain the patterns discernible in all this complexity, it must
trajectories have summed to create those traffic jams.

rise above the microscopic view to other levels, taking on idealizations
when Or imagine tracing all the electrons through a hand calculator as it
mul-necessary so we can see the woods for die trees.

tiplies two numbers together and gets the correct answer. You could be 100

percent sure you understood each of the millions of causal microsteps in the
CHAPTER 5: The contrast between the actual and the possible is
fundamental process and yet still be utterly baffled about why or even how

it always got to all explanation in biology. It seems we need to distinguish
different grades the right answer to the questions you posed it. If this is not
obvious, imagine of possibility, and Darwin provides a framework for a
unified treatment of that somebody made—as a sort of expensive prank—a
hand calculator that biological possibility in terms of accessibility in "the
Library of Mendel," the usually gave the wrong answers! It would obey
exactly the same physical space of all genomes. In order to construct this
useful idealization, we must laws as the good calculator, and would cycle
through the same sorts of acknowledge and then set aside certain
complications in the relations microprocesses. You could have perfect
explanations of how both calculators between a genome and a viable
organism.

worked at the electronic level, and still be utterly unable to explain the
intensely interesting fact that one of them got the answers right and the
other got them wrong. This is the sort of case that shows what would be
silly about the preposterous forms of reductionism; of course you can't
explain all the patterns that interest us at the level of physics (or chemistry,
or any one low level). This is undeniably true of such mundane and
unperplexing phenomena as traffic jams and pocket calculators; we should
expect it to be true of biological phenomena as well. (For more on this
topic, see Dennett 1991b.)

Now consider a parallel question in biology, a textbook standard: why do
giraffes have long necks? There is one answer that could in principle be

"read off" the total Tree of Life, if we had it to look at: Each giraffe has a
neck of the length it has because its parents had necks of the lengths they
had, and so forth back through the generations. If you check them off one
by one, you will see that the long neck of each living giraffe has been traced
back through long-necked ancestors all the way back... to ancestors who
didn't Grades of Possibility? 105

man, who flies faster than the speed of light, is logically possible, but
Duperman, who flies faster than the speed of light without moving
anywhere, CHAPTER FIVE

is not even logically possible. Superman, however, is not physically
possible, since a law of physics proclaims that nothing can move faster than
the speed The Possible and the

of light. There is no dearth of difficulties with this superficially
straightforward distinction. How do we distinguish fundamental physical
laws from logical laws? Is it physically or logically impossible to travel
Actual

backwards in time, for instance? How could we tell for sure whether a
description that is apparently coherent—such as the story in the film Back
to the Future—is subtly self-contradictory or merely denies a very
fundamental (but not logically necessary ) assumption of physics? There is
also no dearth of philosophy dealing with these difficulties, so we will just
acknowledge them and pass on to the next grade.

Superman flies by simply leaping into the air and striking a gallant midair
pose, a talent which is certainly physically impossible. Is a flying horse
physically possible? The standard model from mythology would never get
off the ground—a fact from physics (aerodynamics), not biology—but a 1.
GRADES OF POSSIBILITY?

horse with suitable wingspan could presumably stay aloft. It might have to
be a tiny horse, something aeronautical engineers might calculate from
However many ways there may be of being alive, it is certain that there
considerations of weight-strength ratios, the density of air, and so forth. But
are vastly more ways of being dead, or rather not alive.

now we are descending into the third grade of possibility, biological
possibility, for once we begin considering the strength of bones, and the
pay-

—RICHARD DAWKINS 1986A, P. 9

load requirements for keeping the flapping machinery going, we concern
Any particular non-existent form of life may owe its absence to one of
ourselves with development and growth, metabolism, and other clearly two
reasons. One is negative selection. The other is that the necessary

biological phenomena. Still, the verdict may appear to be that of course
mutations have never appeared.

flying horses are biologically possible, since bats are actual. Maybe even
full-sized flying horses are possible, since there once were pteranodons and

—MARK RIDLEY 1985, P. 56

other flying creatures approaching that size. There is nothing to beat
actuality, present or past, for clinching possibility. Whatever is or has been
actual Take, for instance, the possible fat man in that doorway; and, again,
the is obviously possible. Or is it?

possible bald man in diat doorway. Are they the same possible man, or The
lessons of actuality are hard to read. Could such flying horses really two
possible men? How do we decide? How many possible men are be viable?
Would they perhaps need to be carnivorous to store enough there in mat
doorway? Are there more possible thin ones than fat ones?

energy and carry it aloft? Perhaps—in spite of fruit-eating bats—only a
How many of them are alike? Or would their being alike make them
carnivorous horse could get off the ground. Is a carnivorous horse possible?

one? Are no two possible things alike? Is this the same as saying that it
Perhaps a carnivorous horse would be biologically possible if it could
evolve, is impossible for two things to be alike? Or, finally, is the concept of
but would such a diet shift be accessible from where horses would have to
identity simply inapplicable to unactualized possibles?

start? And, short of radical constructive surgery, could a horse-descendant

—WILLARD VAN ORMAN QLINE 1953, P. 4

have both front legs and wings? Bats, after all, make wings of their arms. Is
there any possible evolutionary history of skeletal revision that would yield
a There seem to be at least four different kinds or grades of possibility: six-
limbed mammal?

logical, physical, biological, and historical, nested in that order. The most
This brings us to our fourth grade of possibility, historical possibility.

lenient is mere logical possibility, which according to philosophical
tradition There might have been a time, in the very distant past, when the
possibility is simply a matter of being describable without contradiction.
Super-of six-limbed mammals on Earth had not yet been foreclosed, but it
might

106 THE POSSIBLE AND THE ACTUAL

The Library of Mendel 107

also be true that once our four-finned fishy ancestors got selected for
moving onto the land, the basic four-limbed architecture was so deeply
anchored in our developmental routines that alteration at this time is no
longer possible.

But even that distinction may not be sharp-edged. Is such an alteration in
fundamental building-plan flat impossible, or just highly unlikely, so
resistant to change that only an astronomically improbable sequence of
selective blows could drive it into existence? It seems there might be two

kinds or grades of biological impossibility: violation of a biological law of
nature (if there are any), and "mere" biohistorical consignment to oblivion.

Historical impossibility is simply a matter of opportunities passed up.

There was a time when many of us worried about the possibility of
President Barry Goldwater, but it didn't happen, and after 1964, the odds
against such a thing's ever happening lengthened reassuringly. When lottery
tickets are put on sale, this creates an opportunity for you: you may choose
to buy one, provided you act by a certain date. If you buy one, this creates a
further opportunity for you—the opportunity to win—but soon it slides into
the past, and it is no longer possible for you to win those millions of dollars.
Is this everyday vision we have of opportunities— real opportunities—an
illusion?

FIGURE 5.1

In what sense could you have won? Does it make a difference if the
winning lottery number is chosen after you buy your ticket, or do you still
have an biological possibility, and then perhaps it will suggest some payoffs
for how opportunity to win, a real opportunity, if the winning number is
sealed in a to make sense of the grander varieties.1

vault before the tickets are put on sale (Dennett 1984)? Is there ever really
any opportunity at all? Could anything happen other than what actually
happens? This dread hypothesis, the idea that only the actual is possible, has
2. T

been called actualism (Ayers 1968). It is generally ignored, for good
reasons, HE LIBRARY OF MENDEL

but these reasons are seldom discussed. (Dennett 1984, and Lewis 1986, pp.

The Argentine poet Jorge Luis Borges is not typically classified as a philos-
36-38, offer good reasons for dismissing actualism.) opher, but in his short
stories he has given philosophy some of its most These familiar and prima
facie reliable ideas about possibility can be valuable thought experiments,
most of them gathered in the stunning col-summed up in a diagram, but

every boundary in it is embattled. As Quine's lection Labyrinths (1962).
Among the best is the fantasy—actually, it is questions suggest, there is
something fishy about casual catalogues of merely more a philosophical
reflection than a narrative—that describes the Library possible objects, but
since science cannot even express—let alone confirm—

of Babel. For us, the Library of Babel will be an anchoring vision for
helping the sorts of explanations we crave without drawing such a
distinction, there is to answer very difficult questions about the scope of
biological possibility, so little chance that we can simply renounce all such
talk. When biologists we will pause to explore it at some length. Borges
tells of the forlorn wonder whether a horned bird—or even a giraffe with
stripes instead of explorations and speculations of some people who find
themselves living in blotches—is possible, the questions they are
addressing epitomize what we want biology to discover for us. Alerted by
Quine, we can be struck by the dubious metaphysical implications of
Richard Dawkins' vivid claim that there are many more ways of being dead
than of being alive, but manifestly 1. Back in 1982, Francois Jacob, the
Nobel laureate biologist, published a book entitled The Possible and the
Actual, and I rushed to read it, expecting it to be an eye-opening he is
getting at something important. We should try to find a way of recasting
essay on how biologists should think about some of these conundrums
about possibility.

such claims in a metaphysically more modest and less contentious To my
disappointment, the book had very little to say on this topic. It is a fine
book, and framework—and Darwin's starting in the middle gives us just the
foothold has a great title, but the two don't go together, in my humble
opinion. The book I was we need. First we can deal with the relation
between historical and eager to read hasn't yet been written, apparently, so
I'll have to try to write part of it myself, in this chapter.

108 THE POSSIBLE AND THE ACTUAL

The Library of Mendel 109

a vast storehouse of books, structured like a honeycomb, composed of
beginning in one volume and continuing without a break in some other

thousands (or millions or billions) of hexagonal air shafts surrounded by
volume or volumes.

balconies lined with shelves. Standing at a railing and looking up or down,
It is amusing to think about some of the volumes that must be in the one
sees no top or bottom to these shafts. Nobody has ever found a shaft that
Library of Babel somewhere. One of them is the best, most accurate 500-
isn't surrounded by six neighboring shafts. They wonder: is the warehouse
page biography of you, from the moment of your birth until the moment of
infinite? Eventually, they decide that it is not, but it might as well be, for it
your death. Locating it, however, would be all but impossible (that slippery
seems that on its shelves—in no order, alas—lie all the possible books.

word), since the Library also contains kazillions of volumes that are mag-
Suppose that each book is 500 pages long, and each page consists of 40

nificently accurate biographies of you up till your tenth, twentieth, thirtieth,
lines of 50 spaces, so there are two thousand character-spaces per page.
Each fortieth ... birthday, and completely false about subsequent events of
your space either is blank, or has a character printed on it, chosen from a set
of life—in a kazillion different and diverting ways. But even finding one
read-100 (the upper- and lowercase letters of English and other European
able volume in this huge storehouse is unlikely in the extreme.

languages, plus the blank and punctuation marks).2 Somewhere in the Li-
We need some terms for the quantities involved. The Library of Babel is
brary of Babel is a volume consisting entirely of blank pages, and another
not infinite, so the chance of finding anything interesting in it is not literally
volume is all question marks, but the vast majority consist of typographical
infinitesimal.4 These words exaggerate in a familiar way—we caught
Darwin gibberish; no rules of spelling or grammar, to say nothing of sense,
prohibit doing it in his summary, where he helped himself to an illicit
"infinitely"—

the inclusion of a volume. Five hundred pages times 2,000 characters per
but we should avoid them. Unfortunately, all the standard metaphors—

page gives 1,000,000 character-spaces per book, so there are 1001,000,000
books

"astronomically large," "a needle in a haystack," "a drop in the ocean"—fall
in the Library of Babel. Since it is estimated3 that there are only 10040
(give or comically short. No actual astronomical quantity (such as the
number of take a few) particles (protons, neutrons, and electrons) in the
region of the elementary particles in the universe, or the time since the Big
Bang measured universe we can observe, the Library of Babel is not
remotely a physically in nanoseconds) is even visible against the backdrop
of these huge but finite possible object, but, thanks to the strict rules with
which Borges constructed numbers. If a readable volume in the Library
were as easy to find as a it in his imagination, we can think about it clearly.

particular drop in the ocean, we'd be in business! If you were dropped at Is
this truly the set of all possible books? Obviously not—since they are
random into the Library, your chance of ever encountering a volume with so
restricted to being printed from "only" 100 different characters, excluding,
much as a grammatical sentence in it would be so vanishingly small that we
we may suppose, the characters of Greek, Russian, Chinese, Japanese, and
might do well to capitalize the term—"Vanishingly" small—and give it a
Arabic, thereby overlooking many of the most important actual books. Of
mate, "Vastly," short for "Very-much-more-than-astronomically."5

course, the Library does contain superb translations of all these actual
books Moby Dick is in the Library of Babel, of course, but so are
100,000,000

into English, French, German, Italian,..., as well as uncountable trillions of
mutant impostors that differ from the canonical Moby Dick by a single
shoddy translations of each book. Books of more than 500 pages are there,
4. The Library of Babel is finite, but, curiously enough, it contains all the
grammatical sentences of English within its walls. But that's an infinite set,
and the library is finite! Still, 2. Borges chose slightly different figures:
books 410 pages long, with 40 lines of 80

any sentence of English, of whatever length, can be broken down into 500-
page chunks, characters each. The total number of characters per book is

close enough to mine each of which is somewhere in the library! How is
this possible? Some books may get (1,312,000 versus 1,000,000) to make
no difference. 1 chose my rounder numbers for used more than once. The
most profligate case is the easiest to understand: since there ease of
handling. Borges chose a character set with only 25 members, which is
enough are volumes that each contain a single character and are otherwise
blank, repeated use of for uppercase Spanish (with a blank, a comma, and a
period as the only punctuation ), but these 100 volumes will create any text
of any length. As Quine points out in his infor-not for English. I chose the
more commodious 100 to make room without any doubt for mative and
amusing essay "Universal Library" (in Quine 1987), if you avail yourself of
the upper- and lowercase letters and punctuation of all the Roman-alphabet
languages.

this strategy of re-using volumes, and translate everything into the ASCII
code your word-processor uses, you can store the whole Library of Babel in
two extremely slender 3. Stephen Hawking (1988, p. 129) insists on putting
it this way: "There are something volumes, in one of which is printed a 0
and in the other of which appears a 1! (Quine also like ten million million
million million million million million million million million points out
that the psychologist Theodor Fechner propounded the fantasy of the
univer-million million million (1 with eighty zeroes after it) particles in the
region of the sal library long before Borges.)

universe that we can observe." Denton (1985 ) provides the estimate of
1070 atoms in the observable universe. Eigen (1992, p. 10) calculates the
volume of the universe as 1084

5. Quine (1987) coins the term "hyperastronomic" for the same purpose.

cubic centimeters.

110 THE POSSIBLE AND THE ACTUAL

The Library of Mendel 111

typographical error. That's not yet a Vast number, but the total rises swiftly
created for himself if he'd tried to arrange them in alphabetical order in his

when we add the variants that differ by 2 or 10 or 1,000 typos. Even a
honeycomb. Since there are only a hundred different alphabetic characters
(in volume with 1,000 typos—2 per page on average—would be
unmistakably our version), we can treat some specific sequence of them as
Alphabetical recognizable as Moby Dick, and there are Vastly many of
those volumes. It Order—e.g., a, A, b, B, c, C ... z, Z, ? , ; , „ . , ! , ) , ( , % ,
. . . a, a, e´, è, e,... Then wouldn't matter which of these volumes you found,
if you could only find we can put all the books beginning with the same
character on the same floor.

one of them. They would almost all be just about equally wonderful
reading, Now our library is only 100 stories high, shorter than the World
Trade and all tell the same story, except for truly negligible—almost
indiscrim-Center. We can divide each floor into 100 corridors, each of
which we line inable—differences. Not quite all of them, however.
Sometimes a single with the books whose second character is the same, one
corridor for each typo, in a crucial position, can be fatal. Peter De Vries,
another philosoph-character, in alphabetical order. On each corridor, we can
place 100 shelves, ically delicious writer of fiction, once published a novel6
that began: one for each third-slot. Thus all the books that begin with
"aardvarks love Mozart"—and how many there are!—are shelved on the
same shelf (the "r"

"Call me, Ishmael."

shelf) in the first corridor on the first floor. But that's a mighty long shelf, so
perhaps we had better stack the books in file drawers at right angles to the
Oh, what a single comma can do! Or consider the many mutants that begin:
shelf, one drawer for each fourth-letter position. That way, each shelf can be

"Ball me Ishmael __ "

only, say, 100 feet long. But now the file drawers are awfully deep, and will
In Borges' story, the books are not shelved in any order, but even if we run
into the backs of the file drawers in the neighboring corridor, so ... but
found them scrupulously alphabetized, we would have insoluble problems
we've run out of dimensions in which to line up the books. We need a
finding the book we were looking for (for instance, the "essential" version

of million-dimensional space to store all the books neatly, and all we have
is Moby Dick). Imagine traveling by spaceship through the Moby Dick
galaxy three dimensions: up-down, left-right, and front-back. So we will
just have to of the Library of Babel. This galaxy is in itself Vastly larger
than the whole pretend we can imagine a multidimensional space, each
dimension running physical universe, so, no matter what direction you go
in, for centuries on

"at right angles" to all the others. We can conceive of such hyperspaces, as
end, even if you travel at the speed of light, all you see are virtually they are
called, even if we can't visualize them. Scientists use them all the
indistinguishable copies of Moby Dick—you will never ever reach anything
time to organize the expression of their theories. The geometry of such that
looks like anything else. David Copperfield is unimaginably distant in
spaces (whether or not they count as only imaginary) is well behaved and
this space, even though we know that there is a path—a shortest path, well
explored by mathematicians. We can confidently speak about locations,
ignoring the kazillions of others—leading from one great book to the other
paths, trajectories, volumes (hypervol-umes), distances, and directions in by
single typographical changes. (If you found yourself on this path, you these
logical spaces.

would find it almost impossible to tell, by local inspection, which direction
to We are now prepared to consider a variation on Borges' theme, which I
go to move towards David Copperfield, even if you had texts of both target
will call the Library of Mendel. This Library contains "all possible ge-books
in hand.)

nomes"—DNA sequences. Richard Dawkins describes a similar space,
which In other words, this logical space is so Vast that many of our usual
ideas he calls "Biomorph Land," in The Blind Watchmaker (1986a). His
discussion about location, about searching and finding and other such
mundane and is the inspiration for mine, and our two accounts are entirely
compatible, but practical activities, have no straightforward application.
Borges put the books I want to stress some points he chose to pass over
lightly.

on the shelves in random order, a nice touch from which he drew several If
we consider the Library of Mendel to be composed of descriptions of
delectable reflections, but look at the problems he would have genomes,
then it is already just a proper part of the Library of Babel. The standard
code for describing DNA consists of only four characters, A, C, G, and T
(standing for Adenine, Cytosine, Guanine, and Thymine, the four kinds of
nucleotides that compose the letters of the DNA alphabet). All the 6. The
Yale of Laughter (1953). (It goes on: "Feel absolutely free to. Call me any
hour 500-page permutations of these four letters are already in the Library
of of the day or night—") De Vries also may have invented the game of
seeing how large an effect (deleterious or not) you can achieve with a single
typographical change. One Babel. Typical genomes are much longer than
ordinary books, however.

of the best: "Whose woods are these, I think I know; his house is in the
Village though___ "

Taking the current estimate of 3 X 109 nucleotides in the human genome,
the Others have taken up the game: in the state of nature, mutant-Hobbes
tells us, one finds exhaustive description of a single human genome—such
as your own—

"the wife of man, solitary, poore, nasty, brutish, and short." Or consider the
question: "Am would take approximately 3,000 of the 500-page volumes in
the Library of I my brothe/'s keeper?"

112 THE POSSIBLE AND THE ACTUAL

The Complex Relation Between Genome and Organism 113

Babel (keeping print size the same).7 The description of the genome for a
splicing laboratory, and, once constructed, would have an indefinite shelf
horse (flying or not) or a cabbage or an octopus would be composed of the
life, like a book in a library. But not every such sequence in the Library of
same letters, A, C, G, and T, and certainly not much longer, so we can
Mendel corresponds to a viable organism. Most DNA sequences—the Vast
suppose, arbitrarily, that the Library of Mendel consists of all the DNA
majority—are surely gibberish, recipes for nothing living at all. That is

what strings described in all the 3,000-volume boxed sets consisting
entirely of Dawkins means, of course, when he says there are many more
ways of being those four characters. This will capture enough of the
"possible" genomes to dead (or not alive) than ways of being alive. But
what kind of a fact is this, serve any serious theoretical purpose.

and why should it be so?

I overstated the case in describing the Library of Mendel as containing "all
possible" genomes, of course. Just as the Library of Babel ignored the
Russian and Chinese languages, so the Library of Mendel ignores the (ap-3.
THE COMPLEX RELATION BETWEEN GENOME AND

parent) possibility of alternative genetic alphabets—based on different
chemical constituents, for instance. We are still beginning in the middle,
ORGANISM

making sure we understand today's local, earthly circumstances before
casting our nets wider. So any conclusions we come to regarding what is
possible If we are going to try to make progress by boldly oversimplifying,
we should relative to this Library of Mendel may have to be reconsidered
when we try at least alert ourselves to some of the complications we are
temporarily to apply them to some broader notion of possibility. This is
actually a strength setting aside. I see three main sorts of complexity we
should acknowledge rather than a weakness of our tactic, since we can keep
close tabs on exactly and keep an eye on as we proceed, even if we are once
again postponing what sort of modest, circumscribed possibility we are
talking about.

their full discussion.

One of the important features of DNA is that all the permutations of The
first concerns the "reading" of the "recipe." The Library of Babel sequences
of Adenine, Cytosine, Guanine, and Thymine are about equally
presupposed readers: the people who inhabited the Library. Without them,
the stable, chemically. All could be constructed, in principle, in the gene-
very idea of the collection of volumes would make no sense at all; their
pages might as well be smeared with jam or worse. If we are to make any

sense of the Library of Mendel, we must also presuppose something
analogous to readers, for without readers DNA sequences don't specify
anything at all—not 7. The comparison of a human genome with the
volumes in the galaxy of Moby Dick blue eyes or wings or anything else.
Deconstructionists will tell you that no readily explains something that
occasionally baffles people about the Human Genome two readers of a text
will come up with the same reading, and something Project. How can
scientists speak of sequencing (copying down) the human genome if similar
is undoubtedly true when we consider the relationship between a every
human genome is different from every other in not just one but hundreds or
thousands of places (loci, in the language of genetics)? Like the proverbial
snowflakes, or genome and the embryonic environment—the chemical mi-
croenvironment fingerprints, no two actual human genomes are exactly
alike, even those of identical twins as well as the surrounding support
conditions—in which it has its (the chance of typos creeping in is always
present, even in the cells of a single individ-informational effects. The
immediate effect of the "reading" of DNA during ual). Human DNA is
readily distinguishable from the DNA of any other species, even that the
creation of a new organism is the fabrication of many different proteins of
the chimpanzee, which is over 90 percent the same at every locus. Every
actual human out of amino acids (which have to be on hand in the vicinity,
of course, ready genome that has ever existed is contained within a galaxy
of possible human genomes that is Vastly distant from the galaxies of other
species' genomes, yet within the galaxy to be linked together). There are
Vastly many possible proteins, but which there is plenty of room for no two
human genomes to be alike. You have two versions of become actual
depends on the DNA text. These proteins get created in strict each of your
genes, one from your mother and one from your father. They passed on to
sequence, and in amounts determined by the "words"— triplets of you
exactly half of their own genes, randomly selected from those they received
from nucleotides—as they are "read." So, for a DNA sequence to specify
what it is their parents, your grandparents, but since your grandparents were
all members of Homo sapiens, their genomes agree at almost all loci, so it
makes no difference most of the time supposed to specify, there must be an
elaborate reader-constructor, well which grandparent provides either of your
genes. But their genomes nevertheless differ stocked with amino-acid
building blocks.8 But that is just a small part of the at many thousands of

loci, and in those slots, which genes you get is a matter of chance—a
process. Once the proteins get created, they have to be coin-toss built into
the machinery for forming your parents' contributions to your DNA.

Moreover, mutations accumulate at the rate of about 100 per genome per
generation in mammals. "That is, your children will have one hundred
differences from you and your spouse in their genes as a result of random
copying errors by your enzymes or as a result 8. This is an
oversimplification, leaving out the role of messenger RNA and other of
mutations in your ovaries or testicles caused by cosmic rays" (Matt Ridley
1993, p.

complications.

45).

114 THE POSSIBLE AND THE ACTUAL

The Complex Relation Between Genome and Organism 115

brought into the right relations with each other. The process begins with a
We will cautiously help ourselves to some poetic license, too. Suppose we
single fertilized cell, which then divides into two daughter cells, which
proceed as if the Library of Mendel were equipped with a single or standard
divide again, and so forth ( each with its own duplicate copy of all the DNA
DNA-reader that can equally well turn out a turnip or a tiger, depending on
that is being read, of course ). These newly formed cells, of many different
the recipe it finds in one of the genome volumes. This is a brutal varieties
(depending on which proteins are jiggled into which places in which
oversimplification, but later we can reopen the question of the
developmental order), must in turn migrate to the right locations in the
embryo, which grows or embryological complications.10 Whatever
standard DNA-reader we by dividing and dividing, building, rebuilding,
revising, extending, repeating, choose, relative to it the Vast majority of
DNA sequences in the Library of and so forth.

Mendel will be utter gibberish. Any attempt to "execute" such a recipe for
This is a process that is only partly controlled by the DNA, which in effect

creating a viable organism would quickly terminate in absurdity. We
wouldn't presupposes (and hence does not itself specify) the reader and the
reading change this picture appreciably if instead we imagined there to be
millions of process. Compare genomes to musical scores. Does a written
score of different dialects of DNA-readers, analogous to the different actual
languages Beethoven's Fifth Symphony specify that piece of music? Not to
Martians, it represented in the Library of Babel. In that Library, the English
books may be wouldn't, because it presupposes the existence of violins,
violas, clarinets, gibberish to the Polish readers and vice versa, but Vastly
most of the volumes trumpets. Suppose we take the score and attach a sheaf
of directions and are gibberish to all readers. Take any one volume at
random, and no doubt we blueprints for making (and playing) all the
instruments, and send the whole can imagine that it is composed in a
language, Babelish, in which it tells a package to Mars. Now we are getting
closer to a package that could in wonderful tale. (Imagination is cheap if we
don't have to bother with the principle be used to re-create Beethoven's
music on Mars. But the Martians details.) But if we remind ourselves that
real languages have to be compact would still have to be able to decipher
the recipe, make the instruments, and and practical things, with short, easily
read sentences that depend on then play them as the score directed.

systematic regularity to get their messages across, we can assure ourselves
This is what makes the story of Michael Crichton's novel Jurassic Park
that, compared with the Vast variety of texts in the Library, the possible
(1990)—and the Steven Spielberg movie made of it—a fantasy: even com-
languages are Vanishingly few. So we might as well pretend, for the time
pletely intact dinosaur DNA would be powerless to re-create a dinosaur
being, that there was just one language, just one sort of reader.

without the aid of a dinosaur-DNA-reader, and those are just as extinct as
The second complexity we may acknowledge and postpone concerns
dinosaurs (they are, after all, the ovaries of dinosaurs). If you have a
(living) viability. A tiger is viable now, in certain existing environments on
our dinosaur ovary, then it, together with dinosaur DNA, can specify
another planet, but would not have been viable in most earlier days, and
may become dinosaur, another dinosaur ovary, and so forth indefinitely, but
dinosaur inviable in the future (as may all life on Earth, in fact). Viability is

relative to DNA by itself, even complete dinosaur DNA, is only half (or,
depending on the environment in which the organism must make its living.
Without how you count, maybe less than half) the equation. We might say
that every breathable atmosphere and edible prey—to take the most obvious
species that has ever existed on this planet has had its own dialect of DNA-
conditions—the organic features that make tigers viable today would be to
reading. Still, these dialects have had a lot in common with each other. The
no avail. And since environments are to a great extent composed of, and by,
principles of DNA-reading are apparently uniform across all species, after
all. That is what makes genetic engineering possible; the organismic effect
of a particular permutation in DNA can often be predicted in practice. So
the idea of bootstrapping our way back to a dinosaur-DNA-reader is a
coherent instance, he suggests, of the Great Chain of Being fallacy.
"Humans, of course, are more closely related to dinosaurs than either is to
frogs. Human DNA would have been better idea, however improbable.
With a helping of poetic license, the film-makers than frog DNA. Bird
DNA would be better still."

might pretend that acceptable substitute readers could be found (introduce
the dinosaur-DNA text to the DNA-reader in a frog, and hope for the best).9

10. A recent theme often heard among evolutionary theorists is that the
"gene centrism"

that is more or less standard these days has gone too far. According to this
complaint, orthodoxy vastly overestimates the extent to which the DNA can
be considered to be a recipe, composed of genes, specifying a phenotype or
an organism. Those who make this claim are the deconstructionists of
biology, elevating the reader to power by demoting the text. It is a useful
theme as an antidote to oversimplified gene centrism, but in 9. The film-
makers never really address the problem of the DNA-reader at all, and use
frog overdose it is about as silly as deconstructionism in literary studies.
This will be given DNA just to patch the missing parts of the dinosaur
DNA. David Haig has pointed out to more attention in chapter 11.

me that this choice of a frog by the film-makers manifests an interesting
error—an 116 THE POSSIBLE AND THE ACTUAL

The Complex Relation Between Genome and Organism 117

the other organisms extant, viability is a constantly changing property, a
Similarly, a gene which caused total blindness would also prevent reading,
moving target, not a fixed condition. This problem is minimized if we join
but it would not usefully be regarded as a gene for not reading. This is
Darwin in starting in the middle, with currently existing environments, and
simply because preventing reading would not be its most obvious or de-
extrapolate cautiously to earlier and later possibilities. We can leave till
later bilitating phenotypic effect. [Dawkins 1982, p. 23. See also Dawkins
1989a, a consideration of the initial bootstrapping that may (or must) have
happened pp. 281-82, and Sterelny and Kitcher 1988.]

to set this coevolution of organisms and their environments in motion.

The third complexity concerns the relationship between the texts of the The
indirect way in which groups of codons—triplets of DNA nucle-genomes
that do determine viable organisms, and the features those organ-otides—
instruct the building process does not prohibit us, then, from speak-isms
exhibit. As we have already noted several times in passing, there is no ing
of a gene for x or for y, using the familiar geneticists' shorthand, and simple
mapping of nucleotide "words" onto Mendelian genes—putative bearing in
mind that that is what we are doing. But it does mean that there carriers of
the "specs" (as an engineer would say) for one feature or another.

may be fundamental differences between the space of genomes and the
space It is simply not the case that there is a sequence of nucleotides that
spells of "possible" organisms. The fact that we can consistently describe a
finished

"blue eyes" or "webbed feet" or "homosexual" in any descriptive language.

product—say, a giraffe with green stripes instead of brown blotches —does
And you can't spell "firm" or "flavorful" in the language of tomato DNA—

not guarantee that there is a DNA recipe for making it. It may just be that,
even though you can revise the nucleotide sequence in that language so that

because of the peculiar requirements of development, there simply is no the
effect is firmer, more flavorful tomatoes.

starting point in DNA that has such a giraffe as its destination.

When this complication is acknowledged, it is usually pointed out that This
may seem very implausible. What could be impossible about a giraffe
genomes are not like descriptions or blueprints of finished products, but
with green stripes? Zebras have stripes, drakes have green feathers on their
more like recipes for building them. This does not mean, as some critics
have heads—there is nothing biologically impossible about the properties in
contended, that it is always—or even ever—a mistake to speak of a gene for
isolation, and surely they can be put together in one giraffe! So you'd think.

this or that. The presence or absence of an instruction in a recipe can make
a But you must not count on it. You'd probably also think a striped animal
with typical and important difference, and whatever difference it makes
may be a spotted tail was possible, but it may well not be. James Murray
(1989) has correctly described as what the instruction—the gene—is "for."
This point developed mathematical models that show how the
developmental process of has been so frequently and influentially missed
by the critics that it is worth distributing color on animals could readily
make a spotted animal with a pausing to expose its error vividly. Richard
Dawkins has come up with an striped tail, but not vice versa. This is
suggestive, but not yet—as some have example that does this so well that it
is worth quoting in full (it also rashly said—a strict proof of impossibility.
Anyone who had learned how to highlights the importance of the second of
our complications, the relativity of build a tiny ship in a bottle—a hard
enough trick— might think it was flat viability to environment):

impossible to put a whole fresh pear in a narrow-necked bottle, but it isn't;
witness the bottles of Poire William liqueur. How is it done? Could the
Reading is a learned skill of prodigious complexity, but this provides no
molten glass somehow be blown around a pear without scorching it? No,
the reason in itself for scepticism about the possible existence of a gene for
bottles are hung on the trees in the spring so that the pears can grow inside
reading. All we would need in order to establish the existence of a gene for
them. Proving that there is no straightforward way for biology to

accomplish reading is to discover a gene for not reading, say a gene which
induced a some trick is never a proof of impossibility. Remember Orgel's
Second Rule!

brain lesion causing specific dyslexia. Such a dyslexic person might be In
his account of Biomorph Land, Dawkins stresses that a tiny—indeed
normal and intelligent in all respects except that he could not read. No
minimal—change in the genotype (the recipe) can produce a strikingly large
geneticist would be particularly surprised if this type of dyslexia turned
change in the phenotype (the resulting individual organism), but he tends to
out to breed true in some Mendelian fashion. Obviously, in this event, the
gene would only exhibit its effect in an environment which included slight
one of the major implications of this: if a single step in the genotype normal
education. In a prehistoric environment it might have had no can produce a
giant step in the phenotype, intermediate steps for the detectable effect, or it
might have had some different effect and have been phenotype may be
simply unavailable, given the mapping rules. To take a known to cave-
dwelling geneticists as, say, a gene for inability to read deliberately extreme
and fanciful example, you might think that if a beast animal footprints. In
our educated environment it would properly be called could have twenty-
centimeter tusks and forty-centimeter tusks, it would a gene 'for' dyslexia,
since dyslexia would be its most salient consequence.

stand to reason that it could also have thirty-centimeter tusks, but the rules
Possibility Naturalized 119

118 THE POSSIBLE AND THE ACTUAL

"more possible" than others—that is, nearer in the multidimensional search
for tusk-making in the recipe system may not allow for such a case. The 1

space, and more accessible, "easier" to get to. Things that would have been
species in question might have to "choose" between tusks ten centimeters
"too viewed as biological impossibilities just a few years ago—such as
plants that short" or ten centimeters "too long." This means that arguments
that proceed glowed in the dark in virtue of having firefly genes in them—
are now not only from engineering assumptions about which design would
be the optimal or best possible but actual. Are twenty-first-century

dinosaurs possible? Well, the design must be extremely cautious in
assuming that what seems intuitively to vehicles for getting there from here
have been developed to the point where we be available or possible is
actually accessible in the organism's design space, can at least tell a
cracking good story—one requiring remarkably little poetic given the way
it reads its recipes. (This will be a major topic in chapters 8, 9, license.
("There" is a portion of the Library of Mendel through which the Tree and
10.)

of Life stopped meandering about sixty million years ago.) What rules
govern travel through this space? What rules or laws constrain the relations
between genomes and their phenotypic products? So far, all we have
acknowledged are 4. POSSIBILITY NATURALIZED

logical or mathematical necessities on the one hand and the laws of physics
on the other. That is, we have proceeded as if we knew what both logical
possibility With the help of the Library of Mendel, we can now resolve—or
at least and (mere) physical possibility were. These are difficult and
controversial unite under a single perspective—some of the nagging
problems about issues, but we may consider them clamped: we simply
assume some fixed

"biological laws" and what is possible, impossible, and necessary in the
version of those varieties of possibility and necessity, and then develop our
world. Recall that we needed to get clear about these issues because, if we
restricted notion of biological possibility in terms of it. The law of large are
to explain the way things are, it must be against a background of how
numbers and the law of gravity, for instance, are both deemed to hold things
might have been, or must be, or couldn't be. We can now define a
unreservedly and timelessly over the space. Clamping physical law lets us
say restricted concept of biological possibility:

flat out, for instance, that all the different genomes are physically possible
—

because chemistry says they are all stable, if encountered.

x is biologically possible if and only if x is an instantiation of an accessible
Keeping logic and physics and chemistry clamped, we could choose a
genome or a feature of its phenotypic products.

different starting point. We could choose some moment on Earth five billion
years ago, and consider what was biologically possible then. Not much,
Accessible from where? By what processes? Ah, there's the rub. We have to
because before tigers could become possible (on Earth), eukaryotes, and
then specify a starting point in the Library of Mendel, and a means of
"travel."

plants producing atmospheric oxygen in large quantities, and many other
Suppose we were to start where we are today. Then we will be talking, first,
things had to become actual. With hindsight, we can say that tigers were in
about what is possible now—that is to say, in the near future, using
whatever fact possible all along, if distant and extremely improbable. One
of the virtues means of travel are currently available to us. We count as
possible all actual of this way of thinking of possibility is that it joins forces
with probability, contemporary species and all their features—including the
features they have thus permitting us to trade in flat all-or-nothing claims
about possibility for in virtue of their relations with other species and their
features— plus claims about relative distance, which is what matters for
most purposes. (The anything that can be obtained by traveling from that
broad front either just "in all-or-nothing claims of biological possibility
were all but impossible [hmm, the course of nature"—without human
manipulation—or with the help of that word again] to adjudicate, so this is
no loss.) As we saw in our such artificial cranes as the techniques of
traditional animal-breeding (and, exploration of the Library of Babel, it
doesn't make much difference what our for that matter, surgery), or via the
fancy new vehicles of genetic engineering.

verdict is about whether it is "possible in principle" to find some particular
After all, we human beings and all our tricks are just another product of the
volume in that Vast space. What matters is what is practically possible, in
one contemporary biosphere. Thus it is biologically possible for you to have
a or another sense of "practical"—take your pick.

fresh turkey dinner on Christmas Day, 2001, if and only if at least one This
is certainly not a standard definition of possibility, or even a standard
instantiated turkey genome has produced the requisite phenotypic effects in
sort of definition of possibility. The idea that some things might be "more
time for dinner. It is biologically possible for you to ride a pter-anodon
before possible" than others (or more possible from over here than from
over there) you die if and only if Jurassic Park-ish technology permits that
sort of is at odds with one standard understanding of the term, and some
genome to get expressed in time.

philosophical critics might say that this is simply not a definition of possi-
No matter how we set these "travel" parameters, the resulting notion of
biological possibility will have an important property: some things will be
120 THE POSSIBLE AND THE ACTUAL

Possibility Naturalized 121

bility, whatever it is. Some other philosophers have defended views of
whether we could count nonactual possible objects. One of the virtues of
the comparative possibility (see especially Lewis 1986, pp. 10ff.), but I
don't proposed treatment of biological possibility is that, thanks to its
"arbitrary"

want to fight over it. If this is not an account of possibility, so be it. It is,
then, formal system—the system arbitrarily imposed on us by nature, at
least in a proposed replacement for a definition of possibility. Perhaps after
all we our neck of the woods—we can count the different nonactual
possible don't need the concept of biological possibility (with its required
all-or-genomes; they are Vast but finite in number, and no two are exactly
alike.

nothing application) for any serious investigative purpose. Perhaps degree
of (By definition, genomes are distinct if they fail to share a nucleotide at
any accessibility in the space of the Library of Mendel is all we need, and is
in one of several billion loci.) In what sense are the nonactual genomes
really fact a better concept than any all-or-nothing version could be. It
would be possible? Only in this sense: if they were formed, they'd be stable.
But nice, for instance, to have some way of ranking the following in terms

of whether or not any conspiracy of events could lead to their being formed
is biological possibility: ten-pound tomatoes, aquatic dogs, flying horses,
flying another matter, to be addressed in terms of accessibility from one
location or trees.

another. Most of the genomes in this set of stable possibilities will never be
That will not be enough to satisfy many philosophers, and their objections
formed, we can be sure, since the heat death of the universe will overtake
the are serious. Briefly considering them will at least make it clearer what I
am building process before it has made a sizable dent in the space.

claiming and what I am not claiming. First of all, isn't there something Two
other objections to this proposal about biological possibility cry out to
viciously circular about defining possibility in terms of accessibility?

be heard. First, isn't it outrageously "gene-centered," in anchoring all
(Doesn't the latter term just reintroduce the former in its suffix, and still
considerations of biological possibility to the accessibility of one genome or
undefined?) Well, not quite. It does leave some definitely unfinished busi-
another in the Library of Mendel? Our proposed treatment of biological
ness, which I will simply acknowledge before moving on. We have
supposed possibility flatly ignores (and hence implicitly rules impossible)
"creatures"

that we are holding some concept or other of physical possibility clamped
for that are not end points of some branch of the Tree of Life that has
already the time being; our idea of accessibility presupposes that this
physical taken us as far as we are today. But that just is the grand
unification of possibility, whatever it is, leaves us some elbow room—some
openness of biology that Darwin discovered! Unless you harbor fantasies
about sponta-pathways (not just a single pathway) in the space. In other
words, we are neous creation of new life forms by "Special Creation" or
(the philosophers'

taking on the assumption that nothing stops us from going down any of the
secular version) "Cosmic Coincidence," you accept that every feature of the
pathways that are open so far as physics is concerned.11

biosphere is one fruit or another of the Tree of Life (or, if not our Tree of
Quine's questions (at the head of this chapter) invited us to worry about
Life, some other Tree of Life, with its own accessibility relations). No man
is an island, John Donne proclaims, and Charles Darwin adds that neither is
any clam or tulip—every possible living thing is connected by isthmuses of
descent to all other living things. Notice that this doctrine rules in whatever
11. This idea of elbow room is something we need to presuppose in any
case, for it is the marvels technology can produce in the future, provided—
as we have already minimal denial of actualism, the doctrine that only the
actual is possible. David Hume, in noted—that technologists themselves,
and their tools and methods, are firmly A Treatise of Human Nature (1739),
spoke of "a certain looseness" we want to exist in our world. This is the
looseness that prevents the possible from shrinking tightly around located
on the Tree of Life. It is a small further step to rule in life forms from the
actual. This looseness is presupposed by any use of the word "can"—a word
we can outer space, provided they, too, are the products of a Tree of Life
rooted, as hardly do without! Some people have thought that, if
determinism were true, actualism ours is, in some nonmiraculous physical
ground. (This topic will be explored would be true—or, to turn it around, if
actualism is false, in determinism must be true—

in chapter 7.)

but this is highly dubious. The implied argument against determinism
would be discon-Second, why should we treat biological possibility so
differently from certingly simple: this oxygen atom has valence 2;
therefore, it can unite with two hydrogen atoms to form a molecule of water
(it can right now, whether or not it does); physical possibility? If we assume
that "laws of physics" fix the limits of therefore, something is possible that
isn't actual, so determinism is false. There are physical possibility, why
shouldn't we attempt to define biological possibility impressive arguments
from physics that lead to the conclusion that determinism is false—

in terms of "laws of biology"? ( We will turn to an examination of physical
but this isn't one of them. I am prepared to assume that actualism is false
(and that this laws and physical necessity in chapter 7, but in the meantime,
the difference assumption is independent of the determinism/indeterminism

question), even if I can't appears large.) Many biologists and philosophers
of science have maintained claim to prove it, if only because the alternative
would be to give up and go play golf or something. But for a somewhat
fuller discussion of actualism, see my book Elbow Room that there are
biological laws. Doesn't the proposed definition rule them out?

( 1984 ), especially ch. 6, "Could Have Done Otherwise," from which
material in this note Or does it declare them superfluous? It doesn't rule
them out. It permits is drawn. See also David Lewis' (1986, ch. 17 )
concurring opinion, about the related issue someone to argue for the
dominion of some law of biology over the of the irrelevance of the issue of
indeterminism to our sense that the future is "open."

Possibility Naturalized 123

122 THE POSSIBLE AND THE ACTUAL

adopted, it resulted in many millions of typewriters and ... the social cost
space of the Library of Mendel, but it does put a difficult burden of proof on
of change ... mounted with the vested interest created by the fact that so
anyone who thinks that there are laws of biology over and above the laws
of many fingers now knew how to follow the QWERTY keyboard.
QWERTY

mathematics and physics. Consider the fate of "Dollo's Law," for instance.

has stayed on despite the existence of other, more "rational" systems.

[Papert 1980, p. 33.]12

'Dollo's Law' states that evolution is irreversible....[But] There is no reason
why general trends in evolution shouldn't be reversed. If there is a trend The
imperious restrictions we encounter inside the Library of Mendel may
towards large antlers for a while in evolution, there can easily be a subse-
look like universal laws of nature from our myopic perspective, but from a
quent trend towards smaller antlers again. Dollo's Law is really just a state-
different perspective they may appear to count as merely local conditions,
ment about the statistical improbability of following exactly the same with

historical explanations.13 If so, then a restricted concept of biological
evolutionary trajectory twice (or indeed any particular trajectory), in
possibility is the sort we want; the ideal of a universal concept of biological
either direction. A single mutational step can easily be reversed. But for
larger numbers of mutational steps... the mathematical space of all possible
possibility will be misguided. But as I have already allowed, this does not
trajectories is so vast that the chance of two trajectories ever arriving at the
rule out biological laws; it merely sets the burden of proof for those who
want same point becomes vanishingly small __ There is nothing mysterious
or to propose any. And in the meantime, it gives us a frame-work for
describing mystical about Dollo's Law, nor is it something that we go out
and 'test' in large and important classes of regularity we discover in the
patterns in our nature. It follows simply from the elementary laws of
probability. [Dawkins biosphere.

1986a, p. 94.]

There is no shortage of candidates for the role of "irreducible biological
CHAPTER 5: Biological possibility is best seen in terms of accessibility
(from law." For instance, many have argued that there are "developmental
laws" or some stipulated location) in the Library of Mendel, the logical
space of all

"laws of form" that constrain the relation between genotype and pheno-
type.

genomes. This concept of possibility treats the connectedness of the Tree of
In due course we will consider their status, but already we can locate at
least Life as a fundamental feature of biology, while leaving it open that
there may some of the most salient constraints on biological possibility as
not "laws of also be biological laws that will also constrain accessibility.

biology" but just inescapable features of the geometry of design space, like
Dollo's Law (or the Hardy-Weinberg Law of gene frequency, which is
CHAPTER 6: The R and D done by natural selection in the course of
creating another application of probability theory, pure and simple).

actual trajectories in the Vast space of possibilities can be measured to
some Take the case of the horned birds. As Maynard Smith notes, there
aren't extent. Among the important features of this search space are the
solutions to any, and we don't know why. Might it be because they are ruled
out by a problems that are perennially attractive and hence predictable, like
forced biological law? Are horned birds flat impossible? Would they have
to be moves in chess. This explains some of our intuitions about originality,
inviable in any and all possible environments, or is there simply no path at
all discovery, and invention, and also clarifies the logic of Darwinian
inference

"from here to there" because of restrictions on the genome-reading process?

about die past. There is a single, unified Design Space in which the
processes As we have already noted, we should be impressed by the severe
restrictions of both biological and human creativity make their tracks, using
similar encountered by this process, but we should not be carried away.
Those methods.

restrictions may not be a universal feature, but a temporally and spatially
local feature, analogous to what Seymour Papert has dubbed the QWERTY

phenomenon in the culture of computers and keyboards.

The top row of alphabetic keys of the standard typewriter reads QWERTY.

12. Others have exploited the QWERTY phenomenon to make similar
points: David For me this symbolizes the way in which technology can all
too often serve 1985, Gould 1991a.

not as a force for progress but for keeping things stuck. The QWERTY

13. George Williams (1985, p. 20) puts it this way: "1 once insisted that'...
the laws of arrangement has no rational explanation, only a historical one. It
was Physical science plus natural selection can furnish a complete
explanation for any bio-introduced in response to a problem in the early
days of the typewriter: logical phenomenon' [Williams 1966, pp. 6-7]. I
wish now I had taken a less extreme The keys used to jam. The idea was to

minimize the collision problem by view and merely identified natural
selection as the only theory that a biologist needs in addition to those of the
physical scientist. Both the biologist and the physical scientist separating
those keys that followed one another frequently.... Once need to reckon with
historical legacies to explain any real-world phenomenon."

Drifting and Lifting Through Design Space 125

tirely in limericks. So it goes. The number of actual books about Charles
Darwin is a huge number, but not a Vast number, and we won't get down to
that set (that set as of today, or as of the year 3000 A.D. ) by just piling on
the CHAPTER SIX

OceanofPDF.com

restricting adjectives in this fashion. To get to the actual books, we have to
Threads of Actuality in

turn to the historical process that created them, in all its grubby
particularity.

The same is true of the actual organisms, or their actual genomes.

We don't need laws of biology to "prevent" most of the physical possi-
Design Space

bilities from becoming actualities; sheer absence of opportunity will
account for most of them. The only "reason" all your nonactual aunts and
uncles never came into existence is that your grandparents didn't have time
or energy (to say nothing of the inclination) to create more than a few of the
nearby genomes. Among the many nonactual possibles, some are—or were
—

"more possible" than others: that is, their appearance was more probable
than the appearance of others, simply because they were neighbors of actual
genomes, only a few choices away in the random zipping-up process that
puts together the new DNA volume from the parent drafts, or only one or a
few random typos away in the great copying process. Why didn't the near-1.
DRIFTING AND LIFTING THROUGH DESIGN SPACE

misses happen? No reason; they just didn't happen to happen. And then, as
the actual genomes that did happen to happen began to move away from the
The actual animals that have ever lived on Earth are a tiny subset of the
locations in Design Space of the near-misses, their probability of ever
theoretical animals that could exist. These real animals are the products
happening grew smaller. They were so close to becoming actual, and then
of a very small number of evolutionary trajectories dvough genetic their
moment passed! Will they get another chance? It is possible, but Vastly
space. The vast majority of theoretical trajectories through animal space
improbable, given the Vast size of the space in which they reside.

give rise to impossible monsters. Real animals are dotted around here But
what forces, if any, bend the paths of actuality farther and farther away and
there among the hypothetical monsters, each perched in its own from their
locations? The motion that occurs if there are no forces at all is unique
place in genetic hyperspace. Each real animal is surrounded by called
random genetic drift. You might think that drift, being random, would a
little cluster of neighbours, most of whom have never existed, but a tend
always to cancel itself out, bringing the path back to the same genomes few
of whom are its ancestors, its descendants and its cousins.

again and again in the absence of any selective forces, but the very fact that

—RICHARD DAWKINS 1986a, p. 73

there is only limited sampling in the huge space (which has a million
dimensions, remember!) leads inevitably to the accumulation of "distance"

The actual genomes that have ever existed are a Vanishingly small subset
between actual genomes (the upshot of "Dollo's Law").

of the combinatorially possible genomes, just as the actual books in the
Darwin's central claim is that when the force of natural selection is im-
world's libraries are a Vanishingly small subset of the books in the
imaginary posed on this random meandering, in addition to drifting there is
lifting. Any Library of Babel. As we survey the Library of Babel, we may
be struck by motion in Design Space can be measured, but the motion of
random drift is, how hard it is to specify a category of books that isn't Vast
in membership, intuitively, merely sideways; it doesn't get us anywhere
important. Consid-however Vanishingly small it is in relation to the whole.
The set of books ered as R-and-D work, it is idle, leading to the
accumulation of mere typo-composed entirely of grammatical English
sentences is a Vast but Vanishing graphical change, but not to the
accumulation of design. In fact, it is worse subset, and the set of readable,
sense-making books is a Vast but Vanishing than that, for most mutations—
typos—will be neutral, and most of the typos subset of it. Vanishingly
hidden in that subset is the Vast set of books about that aren't neutral will
be deleterious. In the absence of natural selection, the people named
Charles, and within that set (though Vanishingly hard to find) drift is

inexorably downward in Design Space. The situation in the Library of is the
Vast set of books purporting to tell the truth about Charles Darwin, and
Mendel is thus precisely like the situation in the Library of Babel. Most a
Vast but Vanishing subset of these consists of books composed en-
typographical changes to Moby Dick can be supposed to be practically 126
THREADS OF ACTUALITY IN DESIGN SPACE

Drifting and Lifting Through Design Space 127

neutral—as good as invisible to most readers; of the few that make a differ-
No analysis of the genomes in isolation of the organisms they create could
ence, most will do damage to the text, making it a worse, less coherent, less
yield the dimension we are looking for. It would be like trying to define the
comprehensible tale. Consider as an exercise, however, the version of Peter
difference between a good novel and a great novel in terms of the relative
De Vries' game in which the object is to improve a text by a single typo-
frequencies of the alphabetical characters in them. We have to look at the
graphical change. It is not impossible, but far from easy!

whole organism, in its environment, to get any purchase on the issue. As
These intuitions about getting somewhere important, about design im-
William Paley saw, what is truly impressive is the bounty of astonishingly
provement, about rising in Design Space, are powerful and familiar, but are
ingenious and smoothly functioning arrangements of matter that go to com-
they reliable? Are they perhaps just a confusing legacy of the pre-
Darwinian pose living things. And when we turn to examining the
organism, we find vision of Design coming down from a Handicrafter God?
What is the rela-again that no mere tabulation of the items composing it is
going to give us tionship between the ideas of Design and Progress? There
is no fixed agree-what we want.

ment among evolutionary theorists about this. Some biologists are
fastidious, What could be the relationship between amounts of complexity
and going to great lengths to avoid allusions to design or function in their
own amounts of design? "Less is more," said the architect Ludwig Mies van
der work, while others build their whole careers around the functional
analysis of Rohe. Consider the famous British Seagull outboard motor, a

triumph of this or that (an organ, patterns of food-gathering, reproductive
"strategies,"

simplicity, a design that honors the principle that what isn't there can't
break.

etc.). Some biologists think you can speak of design or function without We
want to be able to acknowledge—and even measure, if possible— the
committing yourself to any dubious doctrine about progress. Others are not
design excellence manifest in the right sort of simplicity. But what is the so
sure. Did Darwin deal a "death blow to Teleology," as Marx exclaimed, or
right sort? Or what is the right sort of occasion for simplicity? Not every
did he show how "the rational meaning" of the natural sciences was to be
occasion. Sometimes more is more, and of course what makes the British
empirically explained (as Marx went right on to exclaim), thereby making a
Seagull so wonderful is that it is such an elegant marriage of complexity
and safe home in science for functional or teleological discussion?

simplicity; nobody has quite such high regard, nor should they, for a paddle.

Is Design something that can be measured, even indirectly and imper-We
can begin to get a clear view of this if we think about convergent fectly?
Curiously enough, skepticism about this prospect actually undercuts
evolution and the occasions on which it occurs. And, as is so often the case,
the most potent source of skepticism about Darwinism. As I pointed out in
choosing extreme—and imaginary—examples is a good way of focusing on
chapter 3, the most powerful challenges to Darwinism have always taken
this what counts. In this instance, a favorite extreme case to consider is
extra-form: are Darwinian mechanisms powerful enough, or efficient
enough, to terrestrial life, and of course it may someday soon be turned
from fantasy have done all that work in the time available? All what work?
If the question into fact, if SETI, the ongoing Search for Extra-Terrestrial
Intelligence, finds concerned mere sideways drifting in the typographical
space of possible anything. If life on Earth is massively contingent—if its
mere occurrence in genomes, the answer would be obvious and
uncontroversial: Yes, there has any form at all is a happy accident—then
what can we say, if anything, about been much more than enough time. The
speed at which random drift should life on other planets in the universe? We

can lay down some conditions with accumulate mere typographical distance
can be calculated, giving us a sort of confidence approaching certainty.
These at first appear to fall into two posted speed limit, and both theory and
observation agree that actual contrasting groups: necessities and what we
might call "obvious" optimal-evolution happens much slower than that.1
The "products" that are impressive ities.

to the skeptics are not the diverse DNA strings in themselves, but the Let's
consider a necessity first. Life anywhere would consist of entities
amazingly intricate, complex, and well-designed organisms whose genomes
with autonomous metabolisms. Some people would say this is "true by
those strings are.

definition." By defining life in this way, they can exclude the viruses as
living forms, while keeping the bacteria in the charmed circle. There may
be good reasons for such a definitional fiat, but I think we see more clearly
the importance of autonomous metabolism if we see it as a deep if not
utterly necessary condition for the sort of complexity that is needed to fend
off the 1. See, for instance, the discussion in Dawkins 1986a, pp. 124-25,
which concludes: gnawing effects of the Second Law of Thermodynamics.
All complex mac-

"Conversely, strong 'selection pressure', we could be forgiven for thinking,
might be romolecular structures tend to break down over time, so, unless a
system is expected to lead to rapid evolution. Instead, what we find is that
natural selection exerts a braking effect on evolution. The baseline rate of
evolution, in the absence of an open system, capable of taking in fresh
materials and replenishing itself, it natural selection, is the maximum
possible rate. That is synonymous with the mutation will tend to have a
short career. The question "What does it live on?"

rate."

128 THREADS OF ACTUALITY IN DESIGN SPACE

Forced Moves in the Game of Design 129

might get wildly different answers on different planets, but it does not
betray So at least some "biological necessities" may be recast as obvious
solu-a "geocentric"—let alone "anthropocentric"—assumption.

tions to most general problems, as forced moves in Design Space. These are
What about vision? We know that eyes have evolved independently many
cases in which, for one reason or another, there is only one way things can
be times, but vision is certainly not a necessity on Earth, since plants get
along done. But reasons can be deep or shallow. The deep reasons are the
fine without it. A strong case can be made, however, that if an organism is
constraints of the laws of physics—such as the Second Law of Thermody-
going to further its metabolic projects by locomoting, and if the medium in
namics, or the laws of mathematics or logic.2 The shallow reasons are just
which the locomoting takes place is transparent or translucent and amply
historical. There used to be two or more ways this problem might be solved,
supplied by ambient light, then since locomoting works much better (at but
now that some ancient historical accident has set us off down one furthering
self-protective, metabolic, and reproductive aims) if the mover is particular
path, only one way is remotely available; it has become a "virtual guided by
information about distal objects, and since such information can be
necessity," a necessity for all practical purposes, given the cards that have
garnered in a high-fidelity, low-cost fashion by vision, vision is a very good
been dealt. The other options are no longer really options at all.

bet. So we would not be surprised to find that locomoting organisms on
other This marriage of chance and necessity is a hallmark of biological
regular-planets (with transparent atmospheres) had eyes. Eyes are an
obviously good ities. People often want to ask: "Is it merely a massively
contingent fact that solution to a very general problem that would often be
encountered by circumstances are as they are, or can we read some deep
necessity into moving metabolizers. Eyes may not always be "available," of
course, for them?" The answer almost always is: Both. But note that the
type of neces-QWERTY reasons, but they are obviously rational solutions
to this highly sity that fits so well with the chance of random, blind
generation is the abstract design problem.

necessity of reason. It is an inescapably teleological variety of necessity, the
dictate of what Aristotle called practical reasoning, and what Kant called a
hypothetical imperative.

2. FORCED MOVES IN THE GAME OF DESIGN

If you want to achieve goal G, then this is what you must do, given the Now
that we have encountered this appeal to what is obviously rational under
circumstances.

some general set of circumstances, we can look back and see that our case
of necessity, having an autonomous metabolism, can be recast as simply the
The more universal the circumstances, the more universal the necessity.

only acceptable solution to the most general design problem of life. If you
That is why we would not be surprised to find that the living things on other
wanna live, you gotta eat. In chess, when there is only one way of staving
off planets included locomotors with eyes, and why we would be more than
disaster, it is called a forced move. Such a move is not forced by the rules of
surprised—utterly dumfounded—if we found things scurrying around on
chess, and certainly not by the laws of physics (you can always kick the
table various projects but lacking any metabolic processes. But now let us
consider over and run away), but by what Hume might call a "dictate of
reason." It is the difference between the similarities that would surprise us
and the simply dead obvious that there is one and only one solution, as
anybody with similarities that would not. Suppose SETI struck it rich, and
established an ounce of wit can plainly see. Any alternatives are
immediately suicidal.

communication with intelligent beings on another planet. We would not be
In addition to having an autonomous metabolism, any organism must also
surprised to find that they understood and used the same arithmetic that we
have a more or less definite boundary, distinguishing itself from everything
do. Why not? Because arithmetic is right.

else. This condition, too, has an obvious and compelling rationale: "As soon
Might there not be different kinds of arithmetic-like systems, all equally as
something gets into the business of self-preservation, boundaries become

good? Marvin Minsky, one of the founders of Artificial Intelligence, has
important, for if you are setting out to preserve yourself, you don't want to
squander effort trying to preserve the whole world: you draw the line"

(Dennett 1991a, p. 174). We would also expect the locomoting organisms
on an alien planet to have efficiently shaped boundaries, like those of
organisms 2. Are the constraints of pure logic deep or shallow? Some of
each, I guess, depending on on Earth. Why? (Why on Earth?) If cost were
no object, one might have no their obviousness. A delicious parody of
adaptationist thinking is Norman Ellestrand's regard for streamlining in
organisms that move through a relatively dense

"Why are Juveniles Smaller Than Their Parents?" (1983 ), which explores
with a hero-fluid, such as water. But cost is always an object—the Second
Law of ically straight face a variety of "strategic" reasons for JSS (Juvenile
Small Size). It ends with a brave look towards future research: "In
particular, another juvenile character is Thermodynamics guarantees that.

even more widespread than JSS and deserves some thoughtful theoretical
attention, the fact that juveniles always seem to be younger than their
parents."

130 THREADS OF ACTUALITY IN DESIGN SPACE

Forced Moves in the Game of Design 131

explored this curious question, and his ingeniously reasoned answer is No.
In with five subunits. The "solution" of using-whatever-you've-got to count
on

"Why Intelligent Aliens Will Be Intelligible," he offers grounds for
believing is a fairly obvious one, if not quite in the forced-move category.3
It would not in something he calls the

be particularly surprising to find that our aliens had a pair of prehensile
appendages, considering the good reasons there are for bodily symmetry,
and Sparseness Principle: Whenever two relatively simple processes have
prod-the frequency of problems that require one thing to be manipulated

relative to ucts which are similar, those products are likely to be completely
identi-another. But that there should be five subunits on each appendage
looks like a cal! [Minsky 1985a, p. 119, exclamation point in the original.]

QWERTY phenomenon that has been deeply rooted for hundreds of
millions of years—a mere historical happenstance that has restricted our
options, but Consider the set of all possible processes, which Minsky
interprets a la the should not be expected to have restricted theirs. But
perhaps we Library of Babel as all permutations of all possible computers.
(Any com-underestimate the Tightness, the rationality, of having five
subunits. For puter can be identified, abstractly, as one "Turing machine" or
another, and reasons we have not yet fathomed, it may be a Good Idea in
general, and not these can be given unique identifying numbers, and then
put in numerical merely something we are stuck with. Then it would not be
amazing after all order, just like the alphabetical order in the Library of
Babel.) Except for a to find that our interlocutors from outer space had
converged on the same Vanishing few, the Vast majority of these processes
"do scarcely anything at Good Idea, and counted in tens, hundreds, and
thousands.

all." So if you find "two" that do something similar (and worth noticing),
they We would be flabbergasted, however, to find them using the very
symbols are almost bound to be one and the same process, at some level of
analysis.

we use, the so-called arabic numerals: "1," "2," "3" ... We know that right
Minsky (p. 122) applies the principle to arithmetic: here on Earth there are
perfectly fine alternatives, such as the Arabic numerals, " I," "v," " v," "i" ...
as well as some not-so-viable alternatives, such From all this, I conclude
that any entity who searches through the simplest as roman numerals, "i,"
"ii," "iii," "iv" ... If we found the inhabitants of processes will soon find
fragments which do not merely resemble arith-another planet using our
arabic numerals, we would be quite sure that it was metic but are
arithmetic. It is not a matter of inventiveness or imagination, no coincidence
—there had to be a historical connection. Why? Because the only a fact
about the geography of the universe of computation, a world far space of

possible numeral shapes in which there is no reason for choosing more
constrained than that of real things.

one over the others is Vast; the likelihood of two independent "searches"

ending up in the same place is Vanishing.

The point is clearly not restricted to arithmetic, but to all "necessary
Students often have a hard time keeping clear about the distinction be-
truths"—what philosophers since Plato have called a priori knowledge. As
tween numbers and numerals. Numbers are the abstract, "Platonic" objects
Minsky (p. 119 ) says, "We can expect certain 'apriori' structures to appear,
that numerals are the names of. The arabic numeral "4" and the roman
almost always, whenever a computation system evolves by selection from a
numeral "IV" are simply different names for one and the same thing—the
universe of possible processes." It has often been pointed out that Plato's
number 4. (I can't talk about the number without naming it in one way or
curious theory of reincarnation and reminiscence, which he offers as an
another, any more than I can talk about Clinton without using some word
explanation of the source of our a priori knowledge, bears a striking
resemblance to Darwin's theory, and this resemblance is particularly
striking from our current vantage point. Darwin himself famously noted the
resemblance in a remark in one of his notebooks. Commenting on the claim
that 3. Seymour Papert (1993, p. 90) describes observing a "learning
disabled" boy in a Plato thought our "necessary ideas" arise from the pre-
existence of the soul, classroom in which counting on your fingers was
forbidden: "As he sat in the resource Darwin wrote: "read monkeys for
preexistence" (Desmond and Moore 1991, room I could see him itching to
do finger manipulations. But he knew better. Then I saw p. 263).

him look around for something else to count with. Nothing was at hand. I
could see his frustration grow. What could I do?... Inspiration came! I
walked casually up to the boy We would not be surprised, then, to find that
extra-terrestrials had the and said out loud: 'Did you think about your teeth?'
I knew instantly from his face that he same unshakable grip on "2 + 2 = 4"
and its kin that we do, but we would be got the point, and from the aide's
face that she didn't. 'Learning disability indeed!' I said surprised, wouldn't
we, if we found them using the decimal system for to myself. He did his

sums with a half-concealed smile, obviously delighted with the expressing
their truths of arithmetic. We are inclined to believe that our subversive
idea." (When considering using-whatever-you've-got as a possible forced
fondness for it is something of a historical accident, derived from counting
move, it is worth recalling that not all peoples of our Earth have used the
decimal system; the Mayans, for instance, used a base-20 system.)

on our two five-digit hands. But suppose they, too, have a pair of hands,
each 132 THREADS OF ACTUALITY IN DESIGN SPACE

Forced Moves in the Game of Design 133

or words that refer to him, but Clinton is a man, not a word, and numbers
there was a perfectly good engineering reason for the initial choice—it was
aren't symbols either—numerals are.) Here is a vivid way of seeing the just
a reason whose supporting circumstances had long ago lapsed.) importance
of the distinction between numbers and numerals; we have just Design
work—lifting—can now be characterized as the work of discov-observed
that it would not be surprising at all to find that extra-terrestrials ering good
ways of solving "problems that arise." Some problems are given at used the
same numbers we do, but simply incredible if they used the same the outset,
in all environments, under all conditions, to all species. Further numerals.

problems are then created by the initial "attempts at solution" made by In a
Vast space of possibilities, the odds of a similarity between two different
species faced with the first problems. Some of these subsidiary
independently chosen elements is Vanishing unless there is a reason. There
problems are created by the other species of organisms (who must make a is
for numbers (arithmetic is true and variations on arithmetic aren't) and
living, too), and other subsidiary problems are created by a species' own
there isn't for numerals (the symbol "§" would function exactly as well as
the solutions to its own problems. For instance, now that one has decided—
by symbol "5" as a name for the number that follows 4).

flipping a coin, perhaps—to search for solutions in this area, one is stuck
with Suppose we found the extra-terrestrials, like us, using the decimal
system problem B instead of problem A, which poses subproblems p, q, and
r, for most informal purposes, but converting to binary arithmetic when

doing instead of subproblems x, y, and z, and so forth. Should we personify
a computation with the aid of mechanical prosthetic devices (computers).
Their species in this way and treat it as an agent or practical reasoner
(Schull 1990, use of 0 and 1 in their computers (supposing they had
invented computers!) Dennett 1990a)? Alternatively, we may choose to
think of species as would not surprise us, since there are good engineering
reasons for adopting perfectly mindless nonagents, and put the rationale in
the process of natural the binary system, and though these reasons are not
dead obvious, they are selection itself (perhaps jocularly personified as
Mother Nature). Remember probably within striking distance for average-
type thinkers. "You don't have Francis Crick's quip about evolution's being
cleverer than you are. Or we may to be a rocket scientist" to appreciate the
virtues of binary.

choose to shrink from these vivid modes of expression altogether, but the In
general, we would expect them to have discovered many of the various
analyses we do will have the same logic in any case.

ways things have of being the right way. Wherever there are many different
This is what lies behind our intuition that design work is somehow in-ways
of skinning a cat, and none is much better than any other, our surprise
tellectual work. Design work is discernible (in the otherwise uninterpret-
able at their doing it our way will be proportional to how many different
ways we typography of shifting genomes) only if we start imposing reasons
on it. (In think there are. Notice that even when we are contemplating some
Vast earlier work, I characterized these as "free-floating rationales," a term
that number of equivalent ways, a value judgment is implicit. For us to
recognize has apparently induced terror or nausea in many otherwise well-
disposed items as things falling in one of these Vast sets, they have to be
seen as readers. Bear with me; I will soon provide some more palatable
ways of equally good ways, as ways of performing the function x. Function-
alistic making these points.)

thinking is simply inescapable in this sort of inquiry; you can't even So
Paley was right in saying not just that Design was a wonderful thing to
enumerate the possibilities without presupposing a concept of function.
(Now explain, but also that Design took Intelligence. All he missed—and

Darwin we can see that even our deliberately antiseptic formalization of the
Library provided—was the idea that this Intelligence could be broken into
bits so tiny of Mendel invoked functional presuppositions; we can't identify
something and stupid that they didn't count as intelligence at all, and then
distributed as a possible genome without thinking of genomes as things that
might serve through space and time in a gigantic, connected network of
algorithmic a particular function within a reproductive system.) process.
The work must get done, but which work gets done is largely a So there
turn out to be general principles of practical reasoning (including, matter of
chance, since chance helps determine which problems (and in more modern
dress, cost-benefit analysis) that can be relied upon to subproblems and
subsubproblems) get "addressed" by the machinery.

impose themselves on all life forms anywhere. We can argue about
particular Whenever we find a problem solved, we can ask: Who or what
did the work?

cases, but not about the applicability in general of the principles. Are such
Where and when? Has a solution been worked out locally, or long ago, or
design features as bilateral symmetry in locomotors, or mouth-at-the-bow-
was it somehow borrowed (or stolen) from some other branch of the tree? If
it end, to be explained as largely a matter of historical contingency, or
largely a exhibits peculiarities that could only have arisen in the course of
solving the matter of practical wisdom? The only issues to debate or
investigate are their subproblems in some apparently remote branch of the
Tree that grows in relative contributions, and the historical order in which
the contributions Design Space, then barring a miracle or a coincidence too
Cosmic to credit, were made. (Recall that in the actual QWERTY
phenomenon, there must be a copying event of some kind that moved that
completed design work to its new location.

134 THREADS OF ACTUALITY IN DESIGN SPACE

The Unity of Design Space 135

There is no single summit in Design Space, nor a single staircase or ladder
complicated creatures that we are, tend to appreciate complexity, but that
with calibrated steps, so we cannot expect to find a scale for comparing

may well be just an aesthetic preference that goes with our sort of lineage;
amounts of design work across distant developing branches. Thanks to the
other lineages may be as happy as clams with their ration of simplicity.

vagaries and digressions of different "methods adopted," something that is
in some sense just one problem can have both hard and easy solutions,
requiring more or less work. There is a famous story about the
mathematician and physicist (and coinventor of the computer) John von
Neumann, 3. THE UNITY OF DESIGN SPACE

who was legendary for his lightning capacity to do prodigious calculations
in his head. (Like most famous stories, this one has many versions, of
which I The formation of different languages and of distinct species, and
the choose the one that best makes the point I am pursuing.) One day a
colleague proofs that both have been developed through a gradual process,
are approached him with a puzzle that had two paths to solution, a
laborious, curiously the same.

complicated calculation and an elegant, Aha!-type solution. This colleague

—CHARLES DARWIN 1871, p. 59

had a theory: in such a case, mathematicians work out the laborious solution
while the (lazier, but smarter) physicists pause and find the quick and easy
It will not have gone unnoticed that my examples in this chapter have
solution. Which solution would von Neumann find? You know the sort of
wandered back and forth between the domain of organisms or biological
puzzle: Two trains, 100 miles apart, are approaching each other on the same
design, on the one hand, and the domain of human artifacts—books, prob-
track, one going 30 miles per hour, the other going 20 miles per hour. A
bird lems solved, and engineering triumphs on the other. This was by
design, not flying 120 miles per hour starts at train A (when they are 100
miles apart), accident, of course. It was to help set the stage for, and provide
lots of flies to train B, turns around and flies back to the approaching train
A, and so ammunition for, a Central Salvo: there is only one Design Space,
and ev-forth, until the trains collide. How far has the bird flown when the
collision erything actual in it is united with everything else. And I hardly

need add that occurs? "Two hundred forty miles," Von Neumann answered
almost it was Darwin who taught us this, whether he quite realized it or not.

instantly. "Darn," replied his colleague, "I predicted you'd do it the hard
Now I want to go back over the ground we have covered, highlighting the
way." "Ay!" von Neumann cried in embarrassment, smiting his forehead.

evidence for this claim, and drawing out a few more implications of it and

"There's an easy way!" (Hint: how long till the trains collide?) grounds for
believing it. The similarities and continuities are of tremendous Eyes are the
standard example of a problem that has been solved many importance, I
think, but in later chapters I will also point to some important times, but
eyes that may look just the same (and see just the same) may have
dissimilarities between the human-made portions of the designed world and
been achieved by R-and-D projects that involved different amounts of
work, the portions that were created without benefit of the sort of locally
con-thanks to the historical peculiarities of the difficulties encountered
along the centrated, foresighted intelligence we human artificers bring to a
problem.

way. And the creatures that don't have eyes at all are neither better nor
worse We noted at the outset that the Library of Mendel (in the form of
printed on any absolute scale of design; their lineage has just never been
given this volumes of the letters A, C, G, T ) is contained within the Library
of Babel, but problem to solve. It is this same variability in luck in the
various lineages that we should also note that at least a very large portion of
the Library of Babel makes it impossible to define a single Archimedean
point from which global (What portion? See chapter 15) is in turn
"contained" in the Library of Men-progress could be measured. Is it
progress when you have to work an extra del, because we are in the Library
of Mendel ( our genomes are, and so are the job to pay for the high-priced
mechanic you have to hire to fix your car when genomes of all the life
forms our lives depend on). The Library of Babel de-it breaks because it is
too complex for you to fix in the way you used to fix scribes one aspect of
our "extended phenotype" (Dawkins 1982 ). That is, in your old clunker?
Who is to say? Some lineages get trapped in (or are lucky the same way that
spiders make webs and beavers make dams, we make enough to wander

into—take your pick) a path in Design Space in which (among many other
things) books. You can't assess the spider's genome for complexity begets
complexity, in an arms race of competitive design. Others viability without
a consideration of the web that is part of the normal equip-are fortunate
enough (or unfortunate enough-take your pick) to have hit upon ment of the
spider, and you can't assess the viability of our genomes (not any a
relatively simple solution to life's problems at the outset and, having nailed
longer, you can't) without recognizing that we are a species with culture, a it
a billion years ago, have had nothing much to do in the way of design work
representative part of which is in the form of books. We are not just
designed, ever since. We human beings,

we are designers, and all our talents as designers, and our products, must
emerge non-miraculously from the blind, mechanical processes of
Darwinian 136 THREADS OF ACTUALITY IN DESIGN SPACE

The Unity of Design Space 137

mechanisms of one sort or another. How many cranes-on-top-of-cranes
does many, had already perfected the same bold, ingenious strategy of
historical it take to get from the early design explorations of prokaryotic
lineages to die inference in the domain of paleography or philology. I have
several times mathematical investigations of Oxford dons? That is the
question posed by alluded to the works of Plato in this book, but it is "a
miracle" that Plato's Darwinian thinking. The resistance comes from those
who think there must work survives for us to read today in any version at
all. All the texts of his be some discontinuities somewhere, some skyhooks,
or moments of Special Dialogues were essentially lost for over a thousand
years. When they reCreation, or some other sort of miracles, between the
prokaryotes and the emerged at the dawn of the Renaissance in the form of
various tattered, finest treasures in our libraries.

dubious, partial copies of copies of copies from who knows where, this set
in There may be—that will be a question we will look at in many different
motion five hundred years of painstaking scholarship, intended to "purify
the ways in the rest of the book. But we have already seen a variety of deep
text" and establish a proper informational link with the original sources,
parallels, instances in which the very same principles, the very same strat-

which of course would have been in Plato's own hand, or the hand of the
egies of analysis or inference, apply in both domains. There are many more
scribe to whom he dictated. The originals had presumably long since turned
where they came from.

to dust. (Today there are some fragments of papyrus with Platonic text on
Consider, for instance, Darwin's pioneering use of a certain sort of his-them,
and these bits of text may be roughly contemporaneous with Plato torical
inference. As Stephen Jay Gould has stressed (e.g., 1977a, 1980a), it
himself, but they have played no important role in the scholarship, having is
the imperfections, the curious fallings short of what would seem to be been
uncovered quite recently.)

perfect design, that are the best evidence for a historical process of descent
The task that faced the scholars was daunting. There were obviously many
with modification; they are the best evidence of copying, instead of inde-

"corruptions" in the various nonextinct copies (called "witnesses"), and
these pendent re-inventing, of the design in question. We can now see better
why corruptions or errors had to be fixed, but there were also many
puzzling—or this is such good evidence. The odds against two independent
processes'

exciting—passages of dubious authenticity, and no way of asking the author
arriving at the same region of Design Space are Vast unless the design
which were which. How could they be properly distinguished? The element
in question is obviously right, a forced move in Design Space.

corruptions could be more or less rank-ordered in obviousness: (1)
Perfection will be independently hit upon again and again, especially if it is
typographical errors, (2) grammatical errors, (3) stupid or otherwise
baffling obvious. It is the idiosyncratic versions of near-perfection that are a
dead expressions, or ( 4 ) bits that were just not stylistically or doctrinally
like the giveaway of copying. In evolutionary theory, such traits are called
homol-rest of Plato. By Darwin's day, the philologists who devoted their
entire ogies: traits that are similar not because they have to be for
functional professional lives to re-creating the genealogy of their witnesses
had not only reasons, but because of copying. The biologist Mark Ridley

observes, "Many developed elaborate and—for their day—rigorous
methods of comparison, of what are often presented as separate arguments
for evolution reduce to the but had succeeded in extrapolating whole
lineages of copies of copies, and general form of the argument from
homology," and he boils the argument deduced many curious facts about
the historical circumstances of their birth, down to its essence:

reproduction, and eventual death. By an analysis of the patterns of shared
and unshared errors in the existing documents (the carefully preserved
parchment treasures in the Bodleian Library at Oxford, in Paris, in the
Vienna The ear-bones of mammals are an example of a homology. They are
ho-Nationalbibliothek, in the Vatican, and elsewhere), they were able to
deduce mologous with some of the jaw-bones of reptiles. The ear-bones of
mam-hypotheses about how many different copyings there had to have
been, mals did not have to be formed from the same bones as form the jaw
of roughly when and where some of these must have been made, and which
reptiles; but in fact they are __ The fact that species share homologies is an
argument for evolution, for if they had been created separately there
witnesses had relatively recent shared ancestors and which did not.

would be no reason why [emphasis added] they should show homologous
Sometimes the deductive boldness of their work is the equal of anything in
similarities. [Mark Ridley 1985, p. 9]

Darwin: a particular group of manuscript errors, uncorrected and re-copied
in all the descendants in a particular lineage, was almost certainly due to the
fact that the scribe who took the dictation did not pronounce Greek the
same This is how it is in the biosphere, and also how it is in the cultural
sphere of way the reader did, and consequently misheard a particular
phoneme on plagiarism, industrial espionage, and the honest work of
recension of texts.

many occasions! Such clues, together with evidence from other sources on
Here is a curious historical coincidence: while Darwin was fighting his the
history of the Greek language, might even suggest to the scholars which
way clear to an understanding of this characteristically Darwinian mode of
monastery, on which Greek island or mountaintop, in inference, some of his

fellow Victorians, in England and especially in Ger-138 THREADS OF
ACTUALITY IN DESIGN SPACE

The Unity of Design Space 139

which century must have been the scene for the creation of this set of
location that had been worked out by the Babylonians. There are lots of
mutations—even though the actual parchment document created then and
different ways of calculating an ephemeris, and Neugebauer knew that any-
there has long since succumbed to the Second Law of Thermodynamics and
one working out their own ephemeris independently, using their own
system, turned to dust.4

would not have come up with exactly the same numbers as anyone else, Did
Darwin ever learn anything from the philologists? Did any philolo-though
the numbers might have been close. The Babylonian system B was gists
recognize that Darwin had re-invented one of their wheels? Nietzsche
excellent, so the design had been gratefully conserved, in translation, with
all was himself one of these stupendously erudite students of the ancient
texts, its fine-grained particularities. (Neugebauer 1989.)5

and he was one of many German thinkers who were swept up in the Darwin
Neugebauer was a great scholar, but you can probably execute a parallel
boom, but, so far as I know, he never noticed a kinship between Darwin's
feat of deduction, following in his footsteps. Suppose you were sent a pho-
method and that of his colleagues. Darwin himself was struck in later years
tocopy of the text below, and asked the same questions: What does it mean?

by the curious similarity between his arguments and those of the
philologists Where might this be from?

studying the genealogy of languages (not, as in the case of the Plato
scholars, the genealogy of specific texts). In The Descent of Man (1871, p.
59) he pointed explicitly to their shared use of the distinction between
homologies and analogies that could be due to convergent evolution: "We
find in distinct languages striking homologies due to community of descent,
and analogies due to a similar process of formation."

Imperfections or errors are just special cases of the variety of marks that
speak loudly—and intuitively—of a shared history. The role of chance in
twisting the paths taken in a bit of design work can create the same effect
FIGURE 6.1

without creating an error. A case in point: In 1988, Otto Neugebauer, the
Before reading on, try it. You can probably figure it out even if you don't
great historian of astronomy, was sent a photograph of a fragment of Greek
really know how to read the old German Fraktur typeface—and even if you
papyrus with a few numbers in a column on it. The sender, a classicist, had
don't know German! Look again, closely. Did you get it? Impressive stunt!

no clue about the meaning of this bit of papyrus, and wondered if Neuge-
Neugebauer may have his Babylonian column G, but you quickly deter-
bauer had any ideas. The eighty-nine-year-old scholar recomputed the line-
mined, didn't you, that this fragment must be part of a German translation of
to-line differences between the numbers, found their maximum and
minimum some lines from an Elizabethan tragedy (Julius Caesar, act III,
scene ii, lines limits, and determined that this papyrus had to be a
translation of part of 79-80, to be exact). Once you think about it, you
realize that it could hardly

"Column G" of a Babylonian cuneiform tablet on which was written a be
anything else! The odds against this particular sequence of German letters'

Babylonian "System B" lunar ephemeris! (An ephemeris is, like the
Nautical getting strung together under any other circumstances are Vast.
Why? What Almanac, a tabular system for computing the location of a
heavenly body for is the particularity that marks such a string of symbols?

every time in a particular period.) How could Neugebauer make this
Sherlock Nicholas Humphrey (1987) makes the question vivid by posing a
more Holmes-ian deduction? Elementary: what was written in Greek (a
sequence drastic version, if you were forced to "consign to oblivion" one of
the of sexagesimal—not decimal—numbers) was recognized by him to be
part—

following masterpieces, which would you choose: Newton's Principia,
column G!—of a highly accurate calculation of the moon's Chaucer's
Canterbury Tales, Mozart's Don Giovanni, or Eiffel's Tower? "If the choice
were forced," Humphrey answers,

I'd have litde doubt which it should be: the Principia would have to go.

How so? Because, of all those works, Newton's was the only one that was 4.
Scholarship marches on. With the aid of computers, more recent researchers
have shown "that the nineteenth-century model of the constitution and
descent of our manu scripts of Plato was so oversimplified that it must be
counted wrong. That model, in its original form, assumed that all the extant
manuscripts were direct or indirect copies of 5. I am grateful to Noel
Swerdlow, who told this story during die discussion following his one or
more of the three oldest extant manuscripts, each a literal copy; variants in
the talk "The Origin of Ptolemy's Planetary Theory," at the Tufts
Philosophy Colloquium, more recent manuscripts were then to be explained
either as scribal corruption or arbi October 1, 1993, and subsequently
provided me with Neugebauer's paper and an expla-trary emendation,
growing cumulatively with each new copy ___ " (Brumbaugh and Wells
nation of its fine points.

1968, p. 2; the introduction provides a vivid picture of the fairly recent state
of play.) 140 THREADS OF ACTUALITY IN DESIGN SPACE

The Unity of Design Space 141

replaceable. Quite simply: if Newton had not written it, then someone else
methods are cranes, which can be borrowed, with acknowledgment, and
used would—probably within the space of a few years __ Tne Principia
was a to do lifting in other parts of Design Space. In the extreme case, the
crane glorious monument to human intellect, the Eiffel Tower was a
relatively developed by a scientist may be of much more value than the
particular minor feat of romantic engineering; yet the fact is that while
Eiffel did it his lifting accomplished by it, the destination reached. For
instance, a proof of a way, Newton merely did it God's way.

trivial result may nevertheless pioneer a new mathematical method of great
value. Mathematicians put a high value on coming up with a simpler, more
Newton and Leibniz famously quarreled over who got to the calculus first,
elegant proof of something they have already proved—a more efficient and
one can readily imagine Newton having another quarrel with a crane.

contemporary over who should get priority on discovering the laws of In
this context, philosophy can be seen to lie about midway between science
gravitation. But had Shakespeare never lived, for example, no one else
would and the arts. Ludwig Wittgenstein famously stressed that in
philosophy the ever have written his plays and poems. "C P. Snow, in the
Two Cultures, process—the arguing and analyzing—is more important than
the product—the extolled the great discoveries of science as 'scientific
Shakespeare'. But in conclusions reached, the theories defended. Though
this is hotly (and one way he was fundamentally mistaken. Shakespeare's
plays were correctly, in my opinion) disputed by many philosophers who
aspire to solve Shakespeare's plays and no one else's. Scientific discoveries,
by contrast, real problems—and not just indulge in a sort of interminable
logotherapy—

belong—ultimately—to no one in particular" (Humphrey 1987). Intuitively,
even they would admit that we would never want to consign Descartes's the
difference is the difference between discovery and creation, but we now
famous "cogito ergo sum" thought experiment, for example, to oblivion,
even have a better way of seeing it. On the one hand, there is design work
that though none would accept its conclusions; it is just too nifty an
intuition homes in on a best move or forced move which can be seen (in
retrospect, at pump, even if all it pumps is falsehoods (Dennett 1984, p. 18).
Why can't you least) to be a uniquely favored location in Design Space
accessible from copyright a successful multiplication of two numbers?
Because anyone could many starting points by many different paths; on the
other hand, there is do it. It's a forced move. The same is true of any simple
fact that a genius isn't design work the excellence of which is much more
dependent on exploiting (

needed to discover. So how do the creators of tables or other routine (but
and amplifying) the many contingencies of history that shape its trajectory,

a labor-intensive) masses of printed data protect themselves from
unscrupulous trajectory about which the bus company's slogan is an
understatement: copiers? Sometimes they set traps. I am told, for instance,
that the publishers getting there is much more than half the fun.

of Who's Who have dealt with the problem of competitors' simply stealing
all We saw in chapter 2 that even the long-division algorithm can avail itself
their hard-won facts and publishing their own biographical encyclopedias
by of randomness or arbitrary idiosyncrasy—choose a digit at random (or
your quietly inserting a few entirely bogus entries. You can be sure that if
one of favorite digit) and check to see if it's the "right" one. But the actual
idio-those shows up on a competitor's pages, it was no coincidence!

syncratic choices made as you go along cancel out, leaving no trace in the
In the larger perspective of the whole Design Space, the crime of plagia-
final answer, the right answer. Other algorithms can incorporate the random
rism might be defined as theft of crane. Somebody or something has done
choices into the structure of their final products. Think of a poetry-writing
some design work, thereby creating something that is useful in further
design algorithm—or a doggerel-writing algorithm, if you insist—that
begins: work and therefore may have value to anyone or anything embarked
on a

"Choose a noun at random from the dictionary ____ " Such a design
process design project. In our world of culture, where the transmission of
designs can produce something that is definitely under quality control—
selection from agent to agent is enabled by many media of communication,
the pressure—but which nevertheless bears the unmistakable signs of its
par-acquisition of designs developed in other "shops" is a common event,
almost ticular history of creation.

the defining mark of cultural evolution (which will be the topic of chapter
Humphrey's contrast is sharp, but his vivid way of drawing it might 12). It
has commonly been assumed by biologists that such transactions were
mislead. Science, unlike the arts, is engaged in journeys—sometimes races
—

impossible in the world of genetics ( until the dawn of genetic engineering).

with definite destinations: solutions to specific problems in Design Space.

You might say, in fact, that this has been the Official Dogma. Recent But
scientists do care just as much as artists do about the routes taken, and
discoveries suggest otherwise—though only time will tell; no Dogma ever
hence would be appalled at the idea of discarding Newton's actual work and
rolled over and died without a fight. For instance, Marilyn Houck (Houck et
just saving his destination (which someone else would eventually have led
us al. 1991.) has found evidence that, about forty years ago, in either
Florida or Central America, a tiny mite that feeds on fruit flies happened to
to in any case). They care about the actual trajectories because the methods
used in them can often be used again, for other journeys; the good 142
THREADS OF ACTUALITY IN DESIGN SPACE

The Unity of Design Space 143

puncture the egg of a fly of the Drosophila willistoni species, and in the
dependent not just on their authors' biological inheritance, but on the books
process picked up some of that species' characteristic DNA, which it then
that have come before them. This dependence is conditioned by
coincidences inadvertently transmitted to the egg of a (wild) Drosophila
melanogaster fly!

or accidents at every turning. Just look at my bibliography to discover the
This could explain the sudden explosion in the wild of a particular DNA
main lines of genealogy of this book. 1 have been reading and writing about
element common in D. willistoni but previously unheard of in D. melano-
evolution since I was an undergraduate, but if I had not been encouraged
by gaster populations. She might add: What else could explain it? It sure
looks Doug Hofstadter in 1980 to read Dawkins' The Selfish Gene, I
probably like species plagiarism.

would not have begun coalescing some of the interests and reading habits
Other researchers are looking at other possible vehicles for speedy design
that have been major shapers of this book. And if Hofstadter had not been
travel in the world of natural (as opposed to artificial) genetics. If they find
asked by The New York Review of Books to review my book Brainstorms
them, they will be fascinating—but no doubt rare—exceptions to the

(1978), he probably would never have hit upon the bright idea of proposing
orthodox pattern: genetic transmission of design by chains of direct descent
that we collaborate on a book, The Mind's I (1981), and then we would not
only.6 We are inclined, as just noted, to contrast this feature sharply with
have had the opportunity for mutual book-recommending that led me to
what we find in the freewheeling world of cultural evolution, but even there
Dawkins, and so forth. Even if I had read the same books and articles by we
can detect a powerful dependence on the combination of luck and following
other paths, in a different order, I would not be conditioned in copying.

exactly the same way by that reading, and hence would have been unlikely
to Consider all the wonderful books in the Library of Babel that will never
be have composed (and edited, and re-edited) just the string of symbols you
are written, even though the process that could create each of them involves
no now reading.

violation or abridgment of the laws of nature. Consider some book in the
Can we measure this transmission of Design in culture? Are there units of
cultural transmission analogous to the genes of biological evolution? Daw-
Library of Babel that you yourself might love to write—and that only you
kins (1976 ) has proposed that there are, and has given them a name:
memes.

could write—for instance, the poetically expressed autobiographical tale of
Like genes, memes are supposed to be replicators, in a different medium,
but your childhood that would bring tears and laughter to all readers. We
know subject to much the same principles of evolution as genes. The idea
that there that there are Vast numbers of books with just these features in
the Library of might be a scientific theory, memetics, strongly parallel to
genetics, strikes Babel, and each is composable in only a million
keystrokes. At the daw-dling many thinkers as absurd, but at least a large
part of their skepticism is based rate of five hundred strokes a day, the
whole project shouldn't take you much on misunderstanding. This is a
controversial idea, which will get careful longer than six years, with
generous vacations. Well, what's stopping you?

consideration in chapter 12, but in the meantime we can set aside the You
have fingers that work, and all the keys on your word-processor can be

controversies and just use the term as a handy word for a salient ( mem-
depressed independently.

orable) cultural item, something with enough Design to be worth saving—
or Nothing is stopping you. That is, there needn't be any identifiable forces,
stealing or replicating.

or laws of physics or biology or psychology, or salient disabilities brought
on by identifiable circumstances (such as an ax embedded in your brain, or
a gun pointed at you by a credible threatener). There are Vastly many books
The Library of Mendel (or its

twin, the Library of Babel—they

that you are never going to write "for no reason at all." Thanks to the
myriad are contained in each other, after all) is as good an approximate
model of particular twists and turns of your life to date, you just don't
happen to be Universal Design Space as we could ever need to think about.
For the last well disposed to compose those sequences of keystrokes.

four billion years or so, the Tree of Life has been zigzagging through this If
we want to get some perspective—limited, to be sure—on what patterns
Vast multidimensional space, branching and blooming with virtually un-go
into creating your own authorial dispositions, we will have to consider the
imaginable fecundity, but nevertheless managing to fill only a Vanishingly
transmission of Design to you from the books you have read. The books
that small portion of that space of the Possible with Actual designs.7
According actually come to exist in the world's libraries are deeply 6. The
genetic elements transferred in Drosophila are "intragenomic parasites" and
7. "I confess that I believe the emptiness of phenotypic space is filled with
red her-probably have a negative effect on the adaptedness of their host
organisms, so we rings. ... Under the null hypothesis that no constraints at
all exist, the branching path-shouldn't get our hopes up unduly. See Engels
1992.

ways through space taken by this process constitute a random-branching
walk in a 144 THREADS OF ACTUALITY IN DESIGN SPACE

The Unity of Design Space 145

to Darwin's dangerous idea, all possible explorations of Design Space are
must secure its base camp in biology, in part 11, before looking at its power
connected. Not only all your children and your children's children, but all to
transform our understanding of the human world, in part HI.

your brainchildren and your brainchildren's brainchildren must grow from
the common stock of Design elements, genes and memes, that have so far
CHAPTER 7: How did the Tree of Life get started? Skeptics have thought a
been accumulated and conserved by the inexorable lifting algorithms, the
stroke of Special Creation— a skyhook— must be needed to get the evolu-
ramps and cranes and cranes-atop-cranes of natural selection and its
tionary process going. There is a Darwinian answer to this challenge, how-
products.

ever, which exhibits the power of Darwin's universal acid to work its way If
this is right, then all the achievements of human culture—language, art,
down through the lowest levels of the Cosmic Pyramid, showing how even
religion, ethics, science itself—are themselves artifacts ( of artifacts of arti-
the laws of physics might emerge from chaos or nothingness without re-
facts ...) of the same fundamental process that developed the bacteria, the
course to a Special Creator, or even a Lawgiver. This dizzying prospect is
mammals, and Homo sapiens. There is no Special Creation of language,
and one of the most feared aspects of Darwin's dangerous idea, but the fear
is neither art nor religion has a literally divine inspiration. If there are no
misguided.

skyhooks needed to make a skylark, there are also no skyhooks needed to
make an ode to a nightingale. No meme is an island.

Life and all its glories are thus united under a single perspective, but some
people find this vision hateful, barren, odious. They want to cry out against
it, and above all, they want to be magnificent exceptions to it. They, if not
the rest, are made in God's image by God, or, if they are not religious, they
want to be skyhooks themselves. They want somehow to be intrinsic
sources of Intelligence or Design, not "mere" artifacts of the same processes
that mindlessly produced the rest of the biosphere.

So a lot is at stake. Before we turn, in part HI, to examine in detail the
implications of the upward spread of universal acid through human culture,
we need to secure the base camp, by considering a variety of deep
challenges to Darwinian thinking within biology itself. In the process, our
vision of the intricacy and power of the underlying ideas will be enhanced.

CHAPTER 6: There is one Design Space, and in it the Tree of Life has
grown a branch that has recently begun casting its own exploratory threads
into that Space, in the form of human artifacts. Forced moves and other
good ideas are like beacons in Design Space, discovered again and again,
by the ultimately algorithmic search processes of natural selection and
human investigation. As Darwin appreciated, we can retrospectively detect
the historical fact of descent, anywhere in Design Space, when we find
shared design features that would be Vastly unlikely to coexist unless there
was a thread of descent between them. Historical reasoning about evolution
dius depends on accepting Paley's premise: the world is full of good
Design, which took work to create.

This completes die introduction to Darwin's dangerous idea. Now we high-
dimensional space. The typical property of such a walk in a high-
dimensional space is that most of the space is empty" (Kauffman 1993, p.
19).

PART II

DARWINIAN THINKING

IN BIOLOGY

Evolution is a change from a no-howish untalkaboutable all-alikeness by
continuous sticktogetherations and somethingelsifications.

—WILUAM JAMES 1880

Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution.

—THEODOSIUS DOBZHANSKY 1973

CHAPTER SEVEN

Priming Darwin's Pump

1. BACK BEYOND DARWIN'S FRONTIER

And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and
the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in itself, upon the
earth: and it was so.

And the earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed after his kind,
and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in itself, after his kind: and God
saw tint it was good.

—GENESIS 1:11—12

From what sort of seed could the Tree of Life get started? That all life on
Earth has been produced by such a branching process of generation is now
established beyond any reasonable doubt. It is as secure an example of a
scientific fact as the roundness of the Earth, thanks in large part to Darwin.

But how did the whole process get started in the first place? As we saw in
chapter 3, Darwin not only started in the middle; he cautiously refrained
from pushing his own published thinking back to the beginning—the
ultimate origin of life and its preconditions. When pressed by
correspondents, he had little more to say in private. In a famous letter, he
surmised that it was quite possible that life began in "a warm little pond,"
but he had no details to offer about the likely recipe for this primeval
preorganic soup. And in response to Asa Gray, as we saw (see page 67), he
left wide open the possibility that the laws that would govern this Earth-
shattering move were themselves designed—presumably by God.

His reticence on this score was wise on several counts. First, no one knew
better than he the importance of anchoring a revolutionary theory in the
bedrock of empirical facts, and he knew that he could only speculate, with
scant hope in his own day of getting any substantive feedback. After all, as
we have already seen, he didn't even have the Mendelian concept of the 150
PRIMING DARWIN'S PUMP

Back Beyond Darwin's Frontier 151

gene, let alone any of the molecular machinery underlying it. Darwin was
an It is small wonder that Darwin didn't hit upon a suitable mechanism of
intrepid deducer, but he also knew when he didn't have enough premises to
heredity. What do you suppose his attitude would have been to the spec-go
on. Besides, there was his concern for his beloved wife, Emma, who ulation
that within the nucleus of each of the cells in his body there was a
desperately wanted to cling to her religious beliefs, and who could already
copy of a set of instructions, written on huge macromolecules, in the form
of see the threat looming in her husband's work. Yet his reluctance to push
any double helixes tightly kinked into snarls to form a set of forty-six chro-
farther into this dangerous territory, at least in public, went beyond his
mosomes? The DNA in your body, unsnarled and linked, would stretch to
the consideration for her feelings. There is a wider ethical consideration at
stake, sun and back several—ten or a hundred—times. Of course, Darwin is
the which Darwin certainly appreciated.

man who painstakingly uncovered a host of jaw-dropping complexities in
the Much has been written about the moral dilemmas that scientists face
when lives and bodies of barnacles, orchids, and earthworms, and described
them the discovery of a potentially dangerous fact puts their love of truth at
odds with obvious relish. Had he had a prophetic dream back in 1859 about
the with their concern for the welfare of others. Under what conditions, if
any, wonders of DNA, he would no doubt have reveled in it, but I wonder if
he would they be obliged to conceal the truth? These can be real dilemmas,
with could have recounted it with a straight face. Even to those of us
accustomed powerful and hard-to-plumb considerations on both sides. But
there is no to the "engineering miracles" of the computer age, the facts are
hard to controversy at all about what a scientist's ( or philosopher's) moral
encompass. Not only molecule-sized copying machines, but proofreading
obligations should be regarding his or her speculations. Science doesn't
often enzymes that correct mistakes, all at blinding speed, on a scale that
super-advance by the methodical piling up of demonstrable facts; the
"cutting edge"

computers still cannot match. "Biological macromolecules have a storage is
almost always composed of several rival edges, sharply competing and
capacity that exceeds that of the best present-day information stores by
boldly speculative. Many of these speculations soon prove to be
misbegotten, several orders of magnitude. For example, the information
density' in the however compelling at the outset, and these necessary by-
products of genome of E coli, is about 1027 bits/m3" (Kiippers 1990, p.
180).

scientific investigation should be considered to be as potentially hazardous
as In chapter 5, we arrived at a Darwinian definition of biological
possibility any other laboratory wastes. One must consider their
environmental impact.

in terms of accessibility within the Library of Mendel, but the precondition
If their misapprehension by the public would be apt to cause suffering—by
for that Library, as we noted, was the existence of genetic mechanisms of
misleading people into dangerous courses of action, or by undercutting their
staggering complexity and efiiciency. William Paley would have been trans-
allegiance to some socially desirable principle or creed—scientists should
be ported with admiration and wonder at the atomic-level intricacies that
make particularly cautious about how they proceed, scrupulous about
labeling life possible at all. How could they themselves have evolved if they
are the speculations as such, and keeping the rhetoric of persuasion
confined to its precondition for Darwinian evolution?

proper targets.

Skeptics about evolution have argued that this is the fatal flaw in Darwin-
But ideas, unlike toxic fumes or chemical residues, are almost impossible
ism. As we have seen, the power of the Darwinian idea comes from the way
to quarantine, particularly when they concern themes of abiding human it
distributes the huge task of Design through vast amounts of time and space,
curiosity, so, whereas there is no controversy at all about the principle of
preserving the partial products as it proceeds. In Evolution: A Theory in
responsibility here, there has been scant agreement, then or now, about how
Crisis, Michael Denton puts it this way: the Darwinian assumes "that
islands to honor it. Darwin did the best he could: he kept his speculations

pretty of function are common, easily found in the first place, and that it is
easy to much to himself.

go from island to island through functional intermediates" (Denton 1985, p.

We can do better. The physics and chemistry of life are now understood in
317). This is almost right, but not quite. Indeed, the central claim of
dazzling detail, so that much more can be deduced about the necessary and
Darwinism is that the Tree of Life spreads out its branches, connecting
(perhaps) sufficient conditions for life. The answers to the big questions
must

"islands of function" with isthmuses of intermediate cases, but nobody said
still involve a large measure of speculation, but we can mark the
speculations the passage would be "easy" or the safe stopping places
"common." There is as such, and note how they could be confirmed or
discon-firmed. There only one strained sense of "easy" in which Darwinism
is committed to these would be no point any more in trying to pursue
Darwin's policy of reticence; isthmus-crossings' being easy: since every
living thing is a descendant of a too many very interesting cats are already
out of the bag. We may not yet living thing, it has a tremendous leg up; all
but the tiniest fraction of its know exactly how to take all these ideas
seriously, but thanks to Darwin's recipe is guaranteed to have time-tested
viability. The lines of genealogy are secure beachhead in biology, we know
that we can and must.

lifelines indeed; according to Darwinism, the only hope of entering this
cosmic maze of junk and staying alive is to stay on die isthmuses.

152 PRIMING DARWIN'S PUMP

Back Beyond Darwin's Frontier 153

Maybe, it is argued, the Creator does not control the day-to-day succession
of evolutionary events, maybe he did not frame the tiger and the lamb,
maybe he did not make a tree, but he did set up the original machinery of
replication and replicator power, the original machinery of DNA and
protein that made cumulative selection, and hence all of evolution, possible.

This is a transparently feeble argument, indeed it is obviously self-
defeating. Organized complexity is the thing we are having difficulty
explaining. Once we are allowed simply to postulate organized complexity,
if only the organized complexity of the DNA/protein replicating engine, it is
relatively easy to invoke it as a generator of yet more organized
complexity.... But of course any God capable of intelligently designing
something as complex as the DNA/protein replicating machine must have
been at least as complex and organized as the machine itself. [Dawkins
1986a, p. 141.]

As Dawkins goes on to say (p. 316), "The one thing that makes evolution
such a neat theory is that it explains how organized complexity can arise out
of primeval simplicity." This is one of the key strengths of Darwin's idea,
and the key weakness of the alternatives. In fact, I once argued, it is
unlikely that any other theory could have this strength:

Darwin explains a world of final causes and teleological laws with a prin-F

ciple that is, to be sure, mechanistic but—more fundamentally—utterly
IGURE 7.1

independent of "meaning" or "purpose". It assumes a world that is absurd in
the existentialist's sense of the term: not ludicrous but pointless, and this
But how could this process get started? Denton (p. 323) goes to some
assumption is a necessary condition of any non-question-begging account
lengths to calculate the improbability of such a start-up, and arrives at a of
purpose. Whether we can imagine a non-mechanistic but also non-suitably
mind-numbing number.

question-begging principle for explaining design in the biological world is
doubtful; it is tempting to see the commitment to non-question-begging To
get a cell by chance would require at least one hundred functional accounts
here as tantamount to a commitment to mechanistic materialism, proteins to
appear simultaneously in one place. That is one hundred si-but the priority
of these commitments is clear ___ One argues: Darwin's multaneous events
each of an independent probability which could hardly materialistic theory
may not be the only non-question-begging theory of be more than 10-20
giving a maximum combined probability of 102000

these matters, but it is one such theory, and the only one we have found,
which is quite a good reason for espousing materialism. [Dennett 1975, pp.

This probability is Vanishing indeed—next to impossible. And it looks at
171-72.]

first as if the standard Darwinian response to such a challenge could not as
a matter of logic avail us, since the very preconditions for its success—a Is
that a fair or even an appropriate criticism of the religious alternatives?

system of replication with variation—are precisely what only its success
One reader of an early draft of this chapter complained at this point, saying
would permit us to explain. Evolutionary theory appears to have dug itself
that by treating the hypothesis of God as just one more scientific
hypothesis, into a deep pit, from which it cannot escape. Surely the only
thing that could to be evaluated by the standards of science in particular and
rational thought save it would be a skyhook! This was Asa Gray's fond
hope, and the more we in general, Dawkins and I are ignoring the very
widespread claim by behave learned about the intricacies of DNA
replication, the more enticing this lievers in God that their faith is quite
beyond reason, not a matter to which idea has become to those who are
searching for a place to bail out science such mundane methods of testing
applies. It is not just unsympathetic, he with some help from religion. One
might say that it has appeared to many to claimed, but strictly unwarranted
for me simply to assume that the scientific be a godsend. Forget it, says
Richard Dawkins:

method continues to apply with full force in this domain of faith.

154 PRIMING DARWIN'S PUMP

Molecular Evolution 15 5

Very well, let's consider the objection. I doubt that the defender of religion
come up with a good defense of this) or you are kidding yourself. (The ball
will find it attractive, once we explore it carefully. The philosopher Ronald
is now in your court.)

de Sousa once memorably described philosophical theology as "intellectual
Dawkins' retort to the theorist who would call on God to jump-start die
tennis without a net," and I readily allow that I have indeed been assuming
evolution process is an unrebuttable refutation, as devastating today as
when without comment or question up to now that the net of rational
judgment was Philo used it to trounce Cleanthes in Hume's Dialogues two
centuries earlier.

up. But we can lower it if you really want to. It's your serve. Whatever you
A skyhook would at best simply postpone the solution to the problem, but
serve, suppose I return service rudely as follows: "What you say implies
that Hume couldn't think of any cranes, so he caved in. Darwin came up
with God is a ham sandwich wrapped in tinfoil. That's not much of a God to
some magnificent cranes to do middle-level lifting, but can the principles
that worship!" If you then volley back, demanding to know how I can
logically worked so well once be applied again to do the lifting required to
get the justify my claim that your serve has such a preposterous implication,
I will booms of Darwin's cranes off the ground in the first place? Yes. Just
when it reply: "Oh, do you want the net up for my returns, but not for your
serves?

might appear that the Darwinian idea has come to the end of its resources, it
Either the net stays up, or it stays down. If the net is down, there are no
rules jumps niftily down a level and keeps right on going, not just one idea
but and anybody can say anything, a mug's game if there ever was one. I
have many, multiplying like the brooms of the sorcerer's apprentice.

been giving you the benefit of the assumption that you would not waste
your If you want to understand this trick, which at first glance seems
unimag-own time or mine by playing with the net down."

inable, you have to wrestle with some difficult ideas and a raft of details,
both Now if you want to reason about faith, and offer a reasoned (and
reason-mathematical and molecular. This is not the book, and I am not the
author, responsive) defense of faith as an extra category of belief worthy of
special you should consult for those details, and nothing less could really
secure your consideration, I'm eager to play. I certainly grant the existence
of the phe-understanding, so what follows comes with a warning: although I

will try to nomenon of faith; what I want to see is a reasoned ground for
taking faith acquaint you with these ideas, you won't really know them
unless you study seriously as a way of getting to the truth, and not, say, just
as a way people them in the primary literature. (My own grasp on them is
that of an amateur.) comfort themselves and each other (a worthy function
that I do take seri-Imaginative theoretical and experimental explorations of
the possibilities are ously). But you must not expect me to go along with
your defense of faith as now being conducted by so many different
researchers that it practically a path to truth if at any point you appeal to the
very dispensation you are constitutes a subdiscipline at the boundary
between biology and physics.

supposedly trying to justify. Before you appeal to faith when reason has you
Since I cannot hope to demonstrate to you the validity of these ideas—and
backed into a corner, think about whether you really want to abandon
reason you shouldn't trust me if I claimed to do so—why am I presenting
them?

when reason is on your side. You are sightseeing with a loved one in a
Because my purpose is philosophical: I wish to break down a prejudice, the
foreign land, and your loved one is brutally murdered in front of your eyes.
At conviction that a certain sort of theory couldn't possibly work. We have
seen the trial it turns out that in this land friends of the accused may be
called as how Hume's philosophical trajectory got deflected by his inability
to take witnesses for the defense, testifying about their faith in his
innocence. You seriously an opening in the wall that he dimly saw. He
thought he knew that watch the parade of his moist-eyed friends, obviously
sincere, proudly there was no point in heading any further in that direction,
and, as Socrates proclaiming their undying faith in the innocence of the man
you saw commit never tired of pointing out, thinking you know when you
don't is the main the terrible deed. The judge listens intently and
respectfully, obviously more cause of philosophical paralysis. If I can show
that it is conceivable that the moved by this outpouring than by all the
evidence presented by the Darwinian idea can carry through "all the way
down," this will pre-empt a prosecution. Is this not a nightmare? Would you
be willing to live in such a family of glib dismissals that is all too familiar,

and open our minds to other land? Or would you be willing to be operated
on by a surgeon who tells you possibilities.

that whenever a little voice in him tells him to disregard his medical
training, he listens to the little voice? I know it passes in polite company to
let people have it both ways, and under most circumstances I
wholeheartedly cooperate 2. MOLECULAR EVOLUTION

with this benign arrangement. But we're seriously trying to get at the truth
here, and if you think that this common but unspoken understanding about
The smallest catalytically active protein molecules of the living cell faith is
anything better than socially useful obfuscation to avoid mutual consist of
at least a hundred amino acids. For even such a short mol-embarrassment
and loss of face, you have either seen much more deeply into ecule, there
exist 20'°° ~ 1013° alternative arrangements of the twenty this issue than
any philosopher ever has (for none has ever basic monomers. This shows
mat already on the lowest level of com-156 PRIMING DARWIN'S PUMP

Molecular Evolution 157

plexity, that of the biological macromolecules, an almost unlimited variety
algorithm, bare, minimal self-reproducing mechanisms—remarkably like
the of structures is possible.

computer viruses that have recently emerged to fascinate and plague us
(Ray

—BERND-OIAF KUPPERS 1990, p. 11

1992, Dawkins 1993)1 Since these pioneer macros reproduced, they met the
necessary Darwinian conditions for evolution, and it is now clear that they
Our task is to find an algorithm, a natural law that leads to the origin of
spent the better part of a billion years evolving on Earth before there were
information.

any living things.

—MANFRED EIGEN 1992, p. 12

Even the simplest replicating macro is far from simple, however, a
composition with thousands or millions of parts, depending on how we
count the In describing the power of the central claim of Darwinism in the
previous raw materials that go to make it. The alphabet letters Adenine,
Cytosine, section, I helped myself to a slight (!) exaggeration: I said that
every living Guanine, Thymine, and Uracil are bases that are not too
complex to arise in thing is the descendant of a living thing. This cannot be
true, for it implies an the normal course of prebiotic affairs. (RNA, which
came before DNA, has infinity of living things, a set with no first member.
Since we know that the Uracil, whereas DNA has Thymine.) Expert opinion
differs, however, on total number of living things (on Earth, up till now) is
large but finite, we whether these blocks could synthesize themselves by a
series of coincidences seem to be obliged, logically, to identify a first
member—Adam the into something as fancy as a self-replicator. The
chemist Graham Cairns-Protobacterium, if you like. But how could such a
first member come to Smith (1982, 1985) presents an updated version of
Paley's argument, aimed exist? A whole bacterium is much, much too
complicated just to happen into at the molecular level: The process of
synthesizing DNA fragments, even by existence by cosmic accident. The
DNA of a bacterium such as E coli has the advanced methods of modern
organic chemists, is highly elaborate; this around four million nucleotides in
it, almost all of them precisely in order. It shows that their chance creation
is as improbable as Paley's watch in a is quite clear, moreover, that a
bacterium could not get by with much less. So windstorm. "Nucleotides are
too expensive" (Cairns-Smith 1985, pp. 45-49).

here is a quandary: since living tilings have existed for only a finite time,
DNA exhibits too much design work to be a mere product of chance,
Cairns-there must have been a first one, but since all living things are
complex, there Smith argues, but he then proceeds to deduce an ingenious
—if speculative couldn't have been a first one!

and controversial—account of how that work might have been done.
Whether There could only be one solution, and we know it well in outline:
before or not Cairns-Smith's theory is eventually confirmed, it is well worth
sharing there were bacteria, with autonomous metabolisms, there were
much simpler, simply because it so perfectly instantiates the fundamental

Darwinian quasi-living things, like viruses, but unlike them in not (yet)
having any strategy.2

living things to live off parasitically. From the chemist's point of view, A
good Darwinian, faced yet again with the problem of finding a needle in
viruses are "just" huge, complex crystals, but thanks to their complexity,
they a haystack of Design Space, would cast about for a still simpler form
of don't just sit there; they "do things." In particular, they reproduce or self-
replicate, with variations. A virus travels light, packing no metabolic
machinery, so it either stumbles upon the energy and materials required for
self-replication or self-repair, or eventually it succumbs to the Second Law
of 1. Warning: biologists already use the term macroevolution, in contrast to
microevolu-Thermodynamics and falls apart. Nowadays, living cells
provide concen-tion, to refer to large-scale evolutionary phenomena—the
patterns of speciation and trated storehouses for viruses, and viruses have
evolved to exploit them, but extinction, for instance, in contrast to the
refinement of wings or changes in resistance to in the early days, they had
to scrounge for less efficient ways of making more toxins within a species.
What I am calling the evolution of macros has nothing much to copies of
themselves. Viruses today don't all use double-stranded DNA; do with
macroevolution in that established sense. The term macro is so apt for my
some use an ancestral language, composed of single-stranded RNA (which
of purposes, however, that I have decided to stick with it, and try to offset
its shortcomings with this patch—a tactic Mother Nature also often uses.

course still plays a role in our own reproductive system, as an intermediary

"messenger" system during "expression"). If we follow standard practice
and 2. For just this reason, Richard Dawkins also presents a discussion and
elaboration of reserve the term virus for a parasitic macromolecule, we need
a name for Cairns-Smith's ideas in TheBlind Watchmaker (1986a, pp. 148-
58). Since Cairns-Smith's 1985 account and Dawkins' elaboration are such
good reading for nonexperts, I will refer these earliest ancestors. Computer
programmers call a cobbled-together you to them for the delicious details,
and provide just enough summary here to whet fragment of coded
instructions that performs a particular task a "macro," so I your appetite,

adding the warning that there are problems with Cairns-Smith's hypothe-
propose to call these pioneers macros, to stress that although they are "just"

ses, and balancing the warning with the reassurance that even if his
hypotheses are all huge macromolecules, they are also bits of program or
ultimately rejected—an open question—there are other, less readily
understandable, alternatives to take seriously next.

158 PRIMING DARWIN'S PUMP

Molecular Evolution 159

replicator that could somehow serve as a temporary scaffolding to hold the
One of the leading researchers on this period of evolutionary history is
protein parts or nucleotide bases in place until the whole protein or macro
Manfred Eigen. In his elegant little book, Steps Towards Life (1992)—a
good could get assembled. Wondrous to say, there is a candidate with just
the right place to continue your exploration of these ideas—he shows how
the macros properties, and more wondrous still, it is just what the Bible
ordered: clay!

gradually built up what he calls the "molecular tool-kit" that living cells use
Cairns-Smith shows that in addition to the carbon-based self-replicating to
re-create themselves, while also building around themselves the sorts of
crystals of DNA and RNA, there are also much simpler (he calls them "low-
structures that became, in due course, the protective membranes of the first
tech") silicon-based self-replicating crystals, and these silicates, as they are
prokaryotic cells. This long period of precellular evolution has left no fossil
called, could themselves be the product of an evolutionary process. They
traces, but it has left plenty of clues of its history in the "texts" that have
been form the ultra-fine particles of clay, of the sort that builds up just
outside the transmitted to us through its descendants, including, of course,
the viruses strong currents and turbulent eddies in streams, and the
individual crystals that swarm around us today. By studying the actual
surviving texts, the differ subtly at the level of molecular structure in ways
that they pass on specific sequences of A, C, G, and T in the DNA of higher
organisms and the when they "seed" the processes of crystallization that

achieve their self-A, C, G, and U of their RNA counterparts, researchers
can deduce a great replication.

deal about the actual identity of the earliest self-replicating texts, using
Cairns-Smith develops intricate arguments to show how fragments of
refined versions of the same techniques the philologists used to reconstruct
protein and RNA, which would be naturally attracted to the surfaces of
these the words that Plato actually wrote. Some sequences in our own DNA
are crystals like so many fleas, could eventually come to be used by the
silicate truly ancient, even traceable (via translation back into the earlier
RNA crystals as "tools" in furthering their own replication processes.
According to language) to sequences that were composed in the earliest
days of macro this hypothesis (which, like all really fertile ideas, has many
neighboring evolution!

variations, any one of which might prove to be the eventual winner), the
Let's go back to the time when the nucleotide bases (A, C, G, T, and U)
building blocks of life began their careers as quasi-parasites of sorts,
clinging were occasionally present here and there in varying amounts,
possibly con-to replicating clay particles and growing in complexity in the
furtherance of gregated around some of Cairns-Smith's clay crystals. The
twenty different the "needs" of the clay particles until they reached a point
where they could amino acids, the building blocks for all proteins, also
occur with some fend for themselves. No skyhook—just a ladder that could
be thrown away, frequency under a wide range of nonbiotic conditions, so
we can help as Wittgenstein once said in another context, once it had been
climbed.

ourselves to them as well. Moreover, it has been shown by Sidney Fox (Fox
But this cannot be close to the whole story, even if it is all true. Suppose
and Dose 1972) that individual amino acids can condense into "protein-
oids,"

that short self-replicating strings of RNA got created by this low-tech pro-
protein-like substances that have a very modest catalytic ability ( Eigen
1992, cess. Cairns-Smith calls these entirely self-involved replicators
"naked p. 32). This is a small but important step up, since catalytic ability—
the genes," because they aren't for anything except their own replication,

which capacity to facilitate a chemical reaction—is the fundamental talent
of any they do without outside help. We are still left with a major problem:
How did protein.

these naked genes ever come to be clothed? How did these solipsistic self-
Now suppose some of the bases come to pair up, C with G, and A with U,
reproducers ever come to specify particular proteins, the tiny enzyme-and
make smallish complementary sequences of RNA—less than a hundred
machines that build the huge bodies that carry today's genes from
generation pairs long—that can replicate, crudely, without enzymatic
helpers. In terms to generation? But the problem is worse than that, for
these proteins don't just of the Library of Babel, we would now have a
printing press and a book-build bodies; they are needed to assist in the very
process of self-replication bindery, but the books would be too short to be
good for anything except once a string of RNA or DNA gets long. Although
short strings of RNA can making more of themselves, with lots of
misprints. And they would not be replicate themselves without enzyme
assistants, longer strings need a retinue about anything. We may seem to be
right back where we started—or even of helpers, and specifying them
requires a very long sequence—longer than worse. When we bottom out at
the level of molecular building blocks, we could be replicated with high-
enough fidelity until those very enzymes were face a design problem that is
more like construction out of Tinker Toy than already present. We seem to
face paradox once again, in a vicious circle gradual sculpting in modeling
clay. Under the rigid rules of physics, either succinctly described by John
Maynard Smith: "One cannot have accurate the atoms jump together into
stable patterns or they don't.

replication without a length of RNA of, say, 2000 base pairs, and one
cannot Fortunately for us—indeed, fortunately for all living things—
scattered in have that much RNA without accurate replication" (Maynard
Smith 1979, p.

the Vast space of possible proteins there happen to be protein constructions
445).

that—if found—permit life to go forward. How might they get found?
Somehow we have to get those proteins together with the protein-hunters,

the 160 PRIMING DARWIN'S PUMP

Molecular Evolution 161

fragments of self-replicating nucleotide strings that will eventually come to
enough to build plenty of bias into the probability space from the outset.

"specify" them in the macros they compose. Eigen shows how the vicious
So some of the possible macros, inevitably, are more probable—more circle
can turn friendly if it is expanded into a "hypercycle" with more than likely
to be stumbled upon in the Vast space of possibilities—than others.

two elements (Eigen and Schuster 1977). This is a difficult technical
concept, Which ones? The "fitter" ones? Not in any nontrivial sense, but
just in the but the underlying idea is clear enough: imagine a circumstance
in which tautological sense of being identical to (or nearly identical to)
previous fragments of type A can enhance the prospects of hunks of B,
which in turn

"winners," who in turn tended to be almost identical to still earlier
"winners."

promote the well-being of bits of C, which, completing the loop, permit the
(In the million-dimension Library of Mendel, sequences that differ at a
single replication of more fragments of A, and so forth, in a mutually
reinforcing locus are shelved "next to" each other in some dimension; the
distance of any community of elements, until the point is reached where the
whole process one volume from another is technically known as the
Hamming distance.

can take off, creating environments that normally serve to replicate longer
This process spreads "winners" out gradually—taking leaps of small and
longer strings of genetic material. (Maynard Smith 1979 is a great help in
Hamming distances—from any initial starting point in any and all
directions understanding the idea of a hypercycle; see also Eigen 1983.) in
the Library.) This is the most rudimentary possible case of "the rich get But
even if this is possible in principle, how could it get started? If all richer,"
and since the success of the string has an explanation with no possible

proteins and all possible nucleotide "texts" were truly equiproba-ble,
reference beyond the string itself and its resemblance as a string to its
parent then it would be hard to see how the process could ever get going.
Somehow, string, this is a purely syntactic definition of fitness, as opposed
to a semantic the bland, mixed-up confetti of ingredients has to get some
structure imposed definition of fitness (Kiippers 1990, p. 141). That is, you
don't have to on it, concentrating a few "likely-to-succeed" candidates and
thereby making consider what the string means in order to determine its
fitness. We saw in them still more likely to succeed. Remember the coin-
tossing tournament in chapter 6 that mere typographical change could never
explain the Design that chapter 2? Somebody has to win, but the winner
wins in virtue of no virtue, needs explaining, any more than you could
explain the difference in quality but simply in virtue of historical accident.
The winner is not bigger or between two books by comparing their relative
frequencies of alphabetic stronger or better than the other contestants, but is
still the winner. It now characters, but before we can have the meaningful
self-replicating codes that seems that something similar happens in
prebiotic molecular evolution, with make this possible, we have to have
self-replicating codes that don't mean a a Darwinian twist: winners get to
make extra copies of themselves for the thing; their only "function" is to
replicate themselves. As Eigen (1992, p. 15) next round, so that, without
any selection "for cause" (as they say when puts it, "The structural stability
of the molecule has no bearing upon the dismissing potential jurors),
dynasties of sheer replicative prowess begin to semantic information which
it carries, and which is not expressed until the emerge. If we start with a
purely random assortment of "contestants" drawn product of translation
appears."

from the pool of self-replicating fragments, even if they are not initially
This is the birth of the ultimate QWERTY phenomenon, but, like the
distinguishable in terms of their replicative prowess, those that happen to
win cultural case that gives it its name, it was not entirely without point
even in the early rounds will occupy more of the slots in the subsequent
rounds, from the outset. Perfect equiprobability could have dissolved into a
mo-flooding the space with trails of highly similar (short) texts, but still
leaving nopoly by a purely random process, as we have just seen, but
perfect vast hypervolumes of the space utterly empty and inaccessible for

good. The equiprobability is hard to come by in nature at any point, and at
the very initial threads of proto-life can emerge before there is any
difference in skill, beginnings of this process of text generation, a bias was
present. Of the four becoming the actuality from which the Tree of Life can
then grow, thanks to bases—A, C, G, and T—G and C are the most
structurally stable: "Calcula-tournaments of skill. As Eigen's colleague
Bernd-Olaf Küppers (1990, p.

tion of the necessary binding energies, along with experiments on binding
150) puts it, "The theory predicts that biological structures exist, but not
what biological structures exist."3 This is

square. Throw the dice again; go to the square they name and check the
color of the marble on this square and put a marble of that color on the just-
vacated square ( "reproduction" of that marble). Repeat the process, over
and over. Eventually, it has the effect 3. Kiippers (1990, pp. 137-46)
borrows an example from Eigen (1976) to illustrate the of unrandomizing
the initial distribution of colors, so that one color ends up "winning"

underlying idea: a game of "non-Darwinian selection" you can play on a
checkerboard but for no reason at all—just historical luck. He calls this
"non-Darwinian selection"

with differently colored marbles. Start by randomly placing the marbles on
all the squares, because it is selection in the absence of a biasing cause;
selection without adaptation creating the initial confetti effect. Now throw
two (eight-sided!) dice to determine a would be the more familiar term. It is
non-Darwinian only in the sense that Darwin didn't square (column 5, row
7, for instance) on which to act. Remove the marble on that see the
importance of allowing for it, not in the sense that Darwin ( or Darwinism )
cannot accommodate it. Manifestly it can.

162 PRIMING DARWIN'S PUMP

The Laws of the Game of Life 163

and synthesis, show that sequences rich in G and C are best at self-
replication ger, faster, more effective—but also more expensive—self-

replicating sys-by template instruction without the help of enzymes" (Eigen
1992, p. 34).

tems. Our pointless coin-tossing tournament of luck has transformed itself
This is, you might say, a natural or physical spelling bias. In English, "e"
and into a tournament of skill. It has a point, for there is now something for
the

"t" appear more frequently than, say, "u" or "j," but not because "e"s and
"t"s succession of winners to be better at than just, trivially, winning the
coin-are harder to erase, or easier to photocopy, or to write. (In fact, of
course, the toss.

explanation runs the other way around; we tend to use the easiest-to-read-
And does the new tournament ever work! There are tremendous "skill"

and-write symbols for the most frequently used letters; in Morse code, for
differences between proteins, so there is plenty of room for improvement
example, "e" is assigned a single dot and "t" a single dash.) In RNA and
beyond the minuscule catalytic talents of the proteinoids. "In many cases,
DNA, this explanation is reversed: G and C are favored because they are
the enzymic catalysis accelerates a reaction by a factor between one million
and most stable in replication, not because they occur most frequently in
genetic one thousand million. Wherever such a mechanism has been
analysed quan-

"words." This spelling bias is just "syntactic" at the outset, but it unites with
titatively, the result has been the same: enzymes are optimal catalysts"

a semantic bias:

(Eigen 1992, p. 22). Catalytic work done creates new jobs to be done, so the
feedback cycles spread out to encompass more elaborate opportunities for
Examination of the genetic code [by the "philological methods"]... indi-
improvement. "Whatever task a cell is adapted to, it carries out with optimal
cates that its first codons were rich in G and C. The sequences GGC and
efficiency. The blue-green alga, a very early product of evolution,
transforms GCC code respectively for the amino acids glycine and alanine,

and be-light into chemical energy with an efficiency approaching
perfection" (Eigen cause of their chemical simplicity these were formed in
greater abundance 1992, p. 16). Such optimality cannot be happenstance; it
must be the result of

... [in the prebiotic world]. The assertion that the first code-words were a
gradual homing-in process of improvement. So, from a set of tiny biases in
assigned [emphasis added] to the most common amino acids is nothing if
the initial probabilities and competences of the building blocks, a process of
not plausible, and it underlines the fact that the logic of the coding scheme
snowballing self-improvement is initiated.

results from physical and chemical laws and their outworkings in Nature.

[Eigen 1992, p. 34]

These "outworkings" are algorithmic sorting processes, which take the 3.
THE LAWS OF THE GAME OF LIFE

probabilities or biases that are due to fundamental laws of physics and
produce structures that would otherwise be wildly improbable. As Eigen
This most beautiful system of the sun, planets, and comets, could only says,
the resulting scheme has a logic; it is not just two things coming proceed
from the counsel and dominion of an Intelligent and Powerful together but
an "assignment," a system that comes to make sense, and makes Being.

sense because—and only because— it works.

—ISAAC NEWTON 1726 (passage translated in

These very first "semantic" links are of course so utterly simple and local
Ellegard 1956, p. 176)

that they hardly count as semantic at all, but we can see a glimmer of
reference in them nevertheless: there is a fortuitous wedding of a bit of The
more I examine die universe and study the details of its architec-nucleotide
string with a protein fragment that helped directly or indirectly to ture, die
more evidence I find diat die universe in some sense must have reproduce it.

The loop is closed; and once this "semantic" assignment system known diat
we were coming.

is in place, everything speeds up. Now a fragment of code-string can be the

—FREEMAN DYSON 1979, p. 250

code for something—a protein. This creates a new dimension of evaluation,
because some proteins are better than others at doing catalytic work, and It
is easy to imagine a world that, though ordered, nevertheless does not
particularly at assisting in the replication process.

possess the right sort of forces or conditions for the emergence of This
raises the stakes. Whereas at the outset, macro strings could differ
significant depth.

only in their self-contained capacity to self-replicate, now they can magnify

—PALI DAVIES 1992

their differences by creating—and linking their fates to—other, larger,
structures. Once this feedback loop is created, an arms race ensues: longer
and Fortunately for us, the laws of physics vouchsafe that there are, in the
Vast longer macros compete for the available building blocks to build ever
big-space of possible proteins, macromolecules of such breathtaking
catalytic 164 PRIMING DARWIN'S PUMP

The Laws of the Game of Life 165

virtuosity that they can serve as the active building blocks of complex life.

itational attraction, the weak and strong forces of subatomic interaction,
And, just as fortunately, the same laws of physics provide for just enough
Planck's constant—have values that of course permit the actual
development nonequilibrium in the world so that algorithmic processes can
jump-start of the universe as we know it to have happened. But it turns out
that if in themselves, eventually discovering those macromolecules and
turning them imagination we change any of these values by just the tiniest

amount, we into tools for another wave of exploration and discovery. Thank
God for thereby posit a universe in which none of this could have
happened, and those laws!

indeed in which apparently nothing life-like could ever have emerged: no
Well? Shouldn't we? If the laws were any different, we have just seen, the
planets, no atmospheres, no solids at all, no elements except hydrogen and
Tree of Life might never have sprung up. We may have figured out a way of
helium, or maybe not even that—just some boring plasma of hot, undiffer-
excusing God from the task of designing the replication-machinery system
entiated stuff, or an equally boring nothingness. So isn't it a wonderful fact
(which can design itself automatically if any of the theories discussed in the
that the laws are just right for us to exist? Indeed, one might want to add,
we previous section are right, or on the right track) but even if we concede
that almost didn't make it!

this is so, we still have the stupendous fact that the laws do permit this Is
this wonderful fact something that needs an explanation, and, if so, what
wonderful unfolding to happen, and that has been quite enough to inspire
kind of explanation might it receive? According to the Anthropic Principle,
many people to surmise that the Intelligence of the Creator is the Wisdom
of we are entitled to infer facts about the universe and its laws from the the
Lawgiver, instead of the Ingenuity of the Engineer.

undisputed fact that we (we anthropoi, we human beings) are here to do the
When Darwin entertains the idea that the laws of nature are designed by
inferring and observing. The Anthropic Principle comes in several flavors.

God, he has distinguished company, past and present. Newton insisted that
(Among the useful recent books is Barrow and Tipler 1988 and Breuer
1991.

the original arrangement of the universe was inexplicable by "meer natural
See also Pagels 1985, Gardner 1986.)

causes" and could only be ascribed to "the Counsel and Contrivance of a In
the "weak form," it is a sound, harmless, and on occasion useful ap-
Voluntary Agent." Einstein spoke of the laws of nature as the "secrets of the

plication of elementary logic: if x is a necessary condition for the existence
Old One" and famously expressed his disbelief in the role of chance in of y,
and y exists, then x exists. If consciousness depends on complex quantum
mechanics by proclaiming "Gott wiirfelt nicht" —God does not play
physical structures, and complex structures depend on large molecules dice.
More recently, the astronomer Fred Hoyle has said, "I do not believe
composed of elements heavier than hydrogen and helium, then, since we are
that any scientist who examined the evidence would fail to draw the
conscious, the world must contain such elements.

inference that the laws of nuclear physics have been deliberately designed
But notice that there is a loose cannon on the deck in the previous with
regard to the consequences they produce inside the stars" (quoted in
sentence: the wandering "must." I have followed the common practice in
Barrow and Tipler 1988, p. 22). The physicist and cosmologist Freeman
ordinary English of couching a claim of necessity in a technically incorrect
Dyson puts the point much more cautiously: "I do not claim that the archi-
way. As any student in logic class soon learns, what I really should have
tecture of the universe proves the existence of God. I claim only that the
written is:

architecture of the universe is consistent with the hypothesis that mind plays
an essential role in its functioning" (Dyson 1979, p. 251). Darwin himself It
must be the case that: if consciousness depends ... then, since we are was
prepared to propose an honorable truce at this point, but Darwinian
conscious, the world contains such elements.

thinking carries on, with a momentum created by the success of its earlier
applications to the same issue in other contexts.

The conclusion that can be validly drawn is only that the world does contain
As more and more has been learned about the development of the universe
such elements, not that it had to contain such elements. It has to contain
such since the Big Bang, about the conditions that permitted the formation
of elements for us to exist, we may grant, but it might not have contained
such galaxies and stars and the heavy elements from which planets can be
formed, elements, and if that had been the case, we wouldn't be here to be
dismayed.

physicists and cosmologists have been more and more struck by the
exquisite It's as simple as that.

sensitivity of the laws of nature. The speed of light is approximately
186,000

Some attempts to define and defend a "strong form" of the Anthropic miles
per second. What if it were only 185,000 miles per second, or 187,000

Principle strive to justify the late location of the "must" as not casual ex-
miles per second? Would that change much of anything? What if the force
of pression but a conclusion about the way the universe necessarily is. I
admit gravity were 1 percent more or less than it is? The fundamental
constants of that I find it hard to believe that so much confusion and
controversy are physics—the speed of light, the constant of grav-actually
generated by a simple mistake of logic, but the evidence is really

166 PRIMING DARWIN'S PUMP

The Laws of the Game of Life 167

quite strong that this is often the case, and not just in discussions of the
Anthropic Principle. Consider the related confusions that surround

Darwinian deduction in general. Darwin deduces that human beings must
have evolved from a common ancestor of the chimpanzee, or that all life
must have arisen from a single beginning, and some people, unaccountably,
take these deductions as claims that human beings are somehow a necessary
product of evolution, or that life is a necessary feature of our planet, but
nothing of the kind follows from Darwin's deductions properly construed.
What must be the case is not that we are here, but that since we are here, we
evolved from primates. Suppose John is a bachelor. Then he must be single,
right? (That's a truth of logic.) Poor John—he can never get married! The
fallacy is obvious in this example, and it is worth keeping it in the back of
your mind as a template to compare other arguments with.

Believers in any of the proposed strong versions of the Anthropic Principle
think they can deduce something wonderful and surprising from the
FIGURE 7.2

fact that we conscious observers are here—for instance, that in some sense
the universe exists for us, or perhaps that we exist so that the universe as a
whole can exist, or even that God created the universe the way He did so
that is either ON or OFF at each moment. (If it is ON, place a penny on the
square; we would be possible. Construed in this way, these proposals are
attempts to if it is OFF, leave the square empty.) Notice in figure 7.2 that
each cell has restore Paley's Argument from Design, readdressing it to the
Design of the eight neighbors: the four adjacent cells—north, south, east,
and west—and universe's most general laws of physics, not the particular
constructions those the four diagonals—northeast, southeast, southwest, and
northwest.

laws make possible. Here, once again, Darwinian coun-termoves are Time
in the Life world is discrete, not continuous; it advances in ticks, and
available.

the state of the world changes between each two ticks according to the
These are deep waters, and most of the discussions of the issues wallow in
following rule:

technicalities, but the logical force of these Darwinian responses can be
brought out vividly by considering a much simpler case. First, I must in-

Life Physics: For each cell in the grid, count how many of its eight neigh-
troduce you to the Game of Life, a nifty meme whose principal author is the
bors are ON at the present instant. If the answer is exactly two, the cell
stays mathematician John Horton Conway. (I will be putting this valuable
thinking in its present state ( ON or OFF ) in the next instant. If the answer
is exactly three, the cell is

tool to several more uses, as we go along. This game does an excellent job
of ON in the next instant whatever its current state. Under all other
conditions, the cell is OFF.

taking in a complicated issue and reflecting back only the dead-simple
essence or skeleton of the issue, ready to be understood and appreciated.)
That's it—that's the only rule of the game. You now know all there is to Life
is played on a two-dimensional grid, such as a checkerboard, using know
about how to play Life. The entire physics of the Life world is captured
simple counters, such as pebbles or pennies—or one could go high-tech and
in that single, unexceptioned law. Although this is the fundamental law of
play it on a computer screen. It is not a game one plays to win; if it is a
game the "physics" of the Life world, it helps at first to conceive this
curious at all, it is solitaire.4 The grid divides space into square cells, and
each cell physics in biological terms: think of cells going ON as births, cells
going OFF

as deaths, and succeeding instants as generations. Either overcrowding
(more than three inhabited neighbors) or isolation (fewer than two inhabited
4. This description of Life is adapted from an eariier exposition of mine
(1991b). Martin neighbors) leads to death. Consider a few simple cases.

Gardner introduced the Game of Life to a wide audience in two of his
"Mathematical In the configuration in figure 7.3, only cells d and / each
have exactly Games" columns in Scientific American, in October 1970 and
February 1971. Pound-three neighbors

stone 1985 is an excellent exploration of the game and its philosophical
implications.

ON, so they will be the only birth cells in the next generation.

Cells b and h each have only one neighbor ON, SO they die in the next
generation. Cell e has two neighbors ON, SO it stays on. Thus the next

"instant" will be the configuration shown in figure 7.4.

168 PRIMING DARWIN'S PUMP

The Laws of the Game of Life 169

FIGURE 7.3

application of our one law of physics. Or, in the terms I have developed in
earlier writings (1971, 1978, 1987b), when we adopt the physical stance
towards a configuration in the Life world, our powers of prediction are
perfect: there is no noise, no uncertainty, no probability less than one.

Moreover, it follows from the two-dimensionality of the Life world that
nothing is hidden from view. There is no backstage; there are no hidden
variables; the unfolding of the physics of objects in the Life world is
directly and completely visible.

If you find following the simple rule a tedious exercise, there are computer
simulations of the Life world in which you can set up configurations on the
screen and let the computer execute the algorithm for you, changing the
configuration again and again according to the single rule. In the best
simulations, one can change the scale of both time and space, alternating
between close-up and bird's-eye view. A nice touch added to some color
versions is that ON cells (often just called pixels) are color-coded by their
age; Obviously, the configuration will revert back in the next instant, and
this they are born blue, let us say, and then change color each generation,
moving little pattern will flip-flop back and forth indefinitely, unless some
new through green to yellow to orange to red to brown to black and then
staying ON

cells are brought into the picture somehow. It is called a flasher or traffic
black unless they die. This permits one to see at a glance how old certain
light. What will happen to the configuration in figure 7.5?

patterns are, which cells are co-generational, where the birth action is, and
so Nothing. Each

forth.5

ON cell has three neighbors ON, SO it is reborn just as it is.

No

One soon discovers that some simple configurations are more interesting
OFF cell has three neighbors ON, SO no other births happen. This
configuration is called a still life. By the scrupulous application of our
single law, than others. Consider a diagonal line segment, such as the one in
figure 7.6.

one can predict with perfect accuracy the next instant of any configuration
of ON and OFF cells, and the instant after that, and so forth. In other words,
the Life world is a toy world that perfectly instantiates the determinism
made famous 5. Poundstone 1985 provides simple BASIC and IBM-PC
assembly language simulations by Laplace: if we are given the state
description of this world at an instant, you can copy for your own home
computer, and describes some of the interesting we observers can perfectly
predict the future instants by the simple variations.

170 PRIMING DARWIN'S PUMP

The Laws of the Game of Life 171

prey usually cannot. If the remainder of the prey dies out as with the glider,
the prey is consumed. [Poundstone 1985, p. 38.]

Notice that something curious happens to our "ontology"—our catalogue of
what exists—as we move between levels. At the physical level there is no
motion, just ON and OFF, and the only individual things that exist, cells,
are defined by their fixed spatial location. At the design level we suddenly
have the motion of persisting objects; it is one and the same glider (though
composed each generation of different cells) that has moved southeast in
figure 7.6, changing shape as it moves; and there is one less glider in the
world after the eater has eaten it in figure 7.8.

FIGURE 7.6

It is not a flasher; each generation, its two end ON cells die of isolation, and
there are no birth cells. The whole segment soon evaporates. In addition to
the configurations that never change—the still lifes—and those that
evaporate entirely—such as the diagonal line segment—there are
configurations with all manner of periodicity. The flasher, we saw, has a
two-generation period that continues ad infinitum, unless some other
configuration en-Notice, too, that, whereas at the physical level there are
absolutely no croaches. Encroachment is what makes Life interesting:
among the periodic exceptions to the general law, at this level our
generalizations have to be configurations are some that swim, amoebalike,
across the plane. The sim-hedged: they require "usually" or "provided
nothing encroaches" clauses.

plest is the glider, the five-pixel configuration shown taking a single stroke
Stray bits of debris from earlier events can "break" or "kill" one of the to
the southeast in figure 7.7.

objects in the ontology at this level. Their salience as real things is
considerable, but not guaranteed. To say that their salience is considerable
is to say that one can, with some small risk, ascend to this design level,
adopt its ontology, and proceed to predict—sketchily and riskily—the
behavior of larger configurations or systems of configurations, without
bothering to compute the physical level. For instance, one can set oneself
the task of designing some interesting supersystem out of the "parts" that
the design level makes available.

This is just what Conway and his students set out to do, and they suc-Then
there are the eaters, puffer trains, space rakes, and a host of other aptly
ceeded majestically. They designed, and proved the viability of the design
named denizens of the Life world that emerge as recognizable objects at a
of, a self-reproducing entity composed entirely of Life cells that was also
new level. (This level is analogous to what in earlier work I have called the
(for good measure) a Universal Turing machine—it was a two-dimensional
design level. ) This level has its own language, a transparent foreshortening
of computer that in principle can compute any computable function! What
on the tedious descriptions one could give at the physical level. For
instance: Earth inspired Conway and his students to create first this world
and then An eater can eat a glider in four generations. Whatever is being
consumed, this amazing denizen of that world? They were trying to answer
at a very the basic process is the same. A bridge forms between the eater
and its abstract level one of the central questions we have been considering
in this prey. In the next generation, the bridge region dies from
overpopulation, chapter: what is the minimal complexity required for a self-
reproducing taking a bite out of both eater and prey. The eater then repairs
itself. The thing? They were following up the brilliant early speculations of
John von Neumann, who had been working on the question at the time of
his death 172 PRIMING DARWIN'S PUMP

The Laws of the Game of Life 173

in 1957. Francis Crick and James Watson had discovered DNA in 1953, but
Displaying a 1013-pixel pattern would require a video screen about 3

how it worked was a mystery for many years. Von Neumann had imagined
million pixels across at least. Assume the pixels are 1 millimeter square in
some detail a sort of floating robot that picked up pieces of flotsam and
(which is very high resolution by the standards of home computers ). Then
jetsam that could be used to build a duplicate of itself that would then be the
screen would have to be 3 kilometers (about two miles) across. It able to
repeat the process. His description (posthumously published, 1966) would
have an area about six times that of Monaco.

of how an automaton would read its own blueprint and then copy it into its
Perspective would shrink the pixels of a self-reproducing pattern to new

creation anticipated in impressive detail many of the later discoveries
invisibility. If you got far enough away from the screen so that the entire
about the mechanisms of DNA expression and replication, but in order to
pattern was comfortably in view, the pixels (and even the gliders, eaters
make his proof of die possibility of a self-reproducing automaton mathe-
and guns) would be too tiny to make out. A self-reproducing pattern
matically rigorous and tractable, von Neumann had switched to simple,
two-would be a hazy glow, like a galaxy. [Poundstone 1985, pp. 227-28.]

dimensional abstractions, now known as cellular automata. Conway's Life-
world cells are a particularly agreeable example of cellular automata.

In other words, by the time you have built up enough pieces into some-
Conway and his students wanted to confirm von Neumann's proof in thing
that can reproduce itself (in a two-dimensional world), it is roughly as detail
by actually constructing a two-dimensional world with a simple phys-much
larger than its smallest bits as an organism is larger than its atoms. You ics
in which such a self-replicating construction would be a stable, working
probably can't do it with anything much less complicated, though this has
not structure. Like von Neumann, they wanted their answer to be as general
as been strictly proven. The hunch with which we began this chapter gets
possible, and hence as independent as possible of actual (Earthly? local?)
dramatic support: it takes a lot of design work (the work done by Conway
physics and chemistry. They wanted something dead simple, easy to visu-
and his students) to turn available bits and pieces into a self-replicating
alize and easy to calculate, so they not only dropped from three dimensions
thing; self-replicators don't just fall together in cosmic coincidences; they
are to two; they also "digitized" both space and time—all times and
distances, too large and expensive.

as we saw, are in whole numbers of "instants" and "cells." It was von The
Game of Life illustrates many important principles, and can be used to
Neumann who had taken Alan Turing's abstract conception of a mechanical
construct many different arguments or thought experiments, but I will
computer (now called a "Turing machine") and engineered it into the
content myself here with just two points that are particularly relevant to this
specification for a general-purpose stored-program serial-processing stage

in our argument, before turning to my main point. (For further computer
(now called a "von Neumann machine"); in his brilliant reflections on Life
and its implications, see Dennett 1991b.) explorations of the spatial and
structural requirements for such a computer, First, notice how the
distinction between Order and Design gets blurred he had realized—and
proved—that a Universal Turing machine (a Turing here, just as it did for
Hume. Conway designed the whole Life world—that is, machine that can
compute any computable function at all) could in principle he set out to
articulate an Order that would function in a certain way. But do be "built" in
a two-dimensional world.6 Conway and his students also set out gliders, for
instance, count as designed things, or as just natural objects—

to confirm this with their own exercise in two-dimensional engineering.7

like atoms or molecules? Surely the tape-reader Conway and his students
cob-It was far from easy, but they showed how they could "build" a
working bled together out of gliders and the like is a designed object, but
the simplest computer out of simpler Life forms. Glider streams can provide
the input-glider would seem just to fall out of the basic physics of the Life
world "au-output "tape," for instance, and the tape-reader can be some huge
assembly tomatically"—nobody had to design or invent the glider; it just
was discov-of eaters, gliders, and other bits and pieces. What does this
machine look ered to be implied by the physics of the Life world. But that,
of course, is like? Poundstone calculates that the whole construction would
be on the actually true of everything in the Life world. Nothing happens in
the Life order of 1013 cells or pads.

world that isn't strictly implied—logically deducible by straightforward
theorem-proving—by the physics and the initial configuration of cells.
Some of the things in the Life world are just more marvelous and
unanticipated ( by 6. See Dennett 1987b, ch. 9, for more on the theoretical
implications of this trade-off in us, with our puny intellects) than others.
There is a sense in which the Con-space and time.

way self-reproducing pixel-galaxy is "just" one more Life macromolecule 7.
For a completely different perspective on two-dimensional physics and
engineering, with a very long and complicated periodicity in its behavior.

see A. K. Dewdney's The Plantverse (1984 ), a vast improvement over
Abbott's Flatland What if we set in motion a huge herd of these self-
reproducers, and let (1884).

them compete for resources. And suppose they then evolved—that is, their
descendants were not exact duplicates of them. Would these descendants
174 PRIMING DARWIN'S PUMP

The Laws of the Game of Life 175

have a greater claim to having been designed? Perhaps, but there is no line
to theory. I spoke with Conway once about the creation of the Game of
Life, be drawn between merely ordered things and designed things. The
engineer and he lamented the fact that explorations of the Life world were
now almost starts with some objets trouves, found objects with properties
that can be exclusively by "empirical" methods—setting up all the
variations of interest harnessed in larger constructions, but the differences
between a designed and on a computer and letting her rip to see what
happens. Not only did this manufactured nail, a sawn plank, and a naturally
occurring slab of slate are usually shield one from even the opportunity of
devising a strict proof of not "principled." Seagull wings are great lifters,
hemoglobin macromolecules what one found, but, he noted, people using
computer simulations are are superb transporting machines, glucose
molecules are nifty energy-typically insufficiently patient; they try out
combinations and watch them for packets, and carbon atoms are
outstanding all-purpose stickum-binders.

fifteen or twenty minutes, and if nothing of interest has happened, they The
second point is that Life is an excellent illustration of the power— and
abandon them, marking them as avenues already explored and found
barren.

an attendant weakness—of computer simulations addressed to scientific
This myopic style of exploration risks closing off important avenues of
questions. It used to be that the only way to persuade oneself of very
abstract research prematurely. It is an occupational hazard of all computer
simulators, generalizations was to prove them rigorously from the
fundamental principles and it is simply their high-tech version of the

philosopher's fundamental or axioms of whatever theory one had:
mathematics, physics, chemistry, foible: mistaking a failure of imagination
for an insight into necessity. A economics. Earlier in this century, it was
beginning to become clear that prosthetically enhanced imagination is still
liable to failure, especially if it is many of the theoretical calculations one
would like to make in these sciences not used with sufficient rigor.

were simply beyond human capacity—"intractable." Then the computer
came But now it is time for the my main point. When Conway and his
students along to provide a new way of addressing such questions: massive
first set out to create a two-dimensional world in which interesting things
simulations. Simulation of the weather is the example familiar to all of us
would happen, they found that nothing seemed to work. It took more than a
from watching television meteorologists, but computer simulation is also
year for this industrious and ingenious group of intelligent searchers to find
revolutionizing how science is conducted in many other fields, probably the
the simple Life Physics rule in the Vast space of possible simple rules. All
most important epistemological advance in scientific method since the the
obvious variations turned out to be hopeless. To get some sense of this,
invention of accurate timekeeping devices. In evolutionary theory, the new
try altering the "constants" for birth and death—change the birth rule from
discipline of Artificial Life has recently sprung up to provide a name and an
three to four, for instance—and see what happens. The worlds these
umbrella to cover a veritable Gold Rush of researchers at different levels,
variations govern either freeze up solid in no time or evaporate into noth-
from the submolecular to the ecological. Even among those researchers who
ingness in no time. Conway and his students wanted a world in which
growth have not taken up the banner of Artificial Life, however, there is
general was possible, but not too explosive; in which "things"—higher-
order patterns acknowledgment that most of their theoretical research on
evolution—most of cells—could move, and change, but also retain their
identity over time.

of the recent work discussed in this book, for instance—would have been
And of course it had to be a world in which structures could "do things" of
simply unthinkable without computer simulations to test (to confirm or
interest (like eat or make tracks or repel things). Of all the imaginable two-

disconfirm) the intuitions of the theoreticians. Indeed, as we have seen, the
dimensional worlds, so far as Conway knows, there is only one that meets
very idea of evolution as an algorithmic process could not be properly these
desiderata: the Life world. In any event, the variations that have been
formulated and evaluated until it was possible to test huge, complicated
checked in subsequent years have never come close to measuring up to
algorithmic models in place of the wildly oversimple models of earlier
Conway's in terms of interest, simplicity, fecundity, elegance. The Life
world theorists.

might indeed be the best of all possible (two-dimensional ) worlds.

Now, some scientific problems are not amenable to solution-by-Now
suppose that some self-reproducing Universal Turing machines in the
simulation, and others are probably only amenable to solution-by-
simulation, Life world were to have a conversation with each other about
the world as but in between there are problems that can in principle be
addressed in two they found it, with its wonderfully simple physics—
expressible in a single different ways, reminiscent of the two different ways
of solving the train sentence and covering all eventualities.8 They would be
committing a log-problem given to von Neumann—a "deep" way via
theory, and a "shallow"

way via brute-force simulation and inspection. It would be a shame if the
many undeniable attractions of simulated worlds drowned out our
aspirations 8. John McCarthy has for years been exploring the theoretical
question of the minimal to understand these phenomena in the deep ways of

Life-world configuration that can learn the physics of its own world, and
has tried to enlist 176 PRIMING DARWIN'S PUMP

The Laws of the Game of Life 177

ical howler if they argued that since they existed, die Life world, with its
extrapolate a positive Darwinian alternative to the hypothesis that our laws
particular physics, had to exist—for after all, Conway might have decided
to are a gift from God. What would the Darwinian alternative have to be?
That be a plumber or play bridge instead of hunting for this world. But what

if there has been an evolution of worlds (in the sense of whole universes),
and they deduced that their world was just too wonderful, with its elegant,
Life-the world we find ourselves in is simply one among countless others
that sustaining physics, to have come into existence without an Intelligent
have existed through eternity. There are two quite different ways of thinking
Creator? If they jumped to the conclusion that they owed their existence to
about the evolution of laws, one of them stronger, more "Darwinian," than
the activities of a wise Lawgiver, they'd be right! There is a God and his the
other in that it involves something like natural selection.

name is Conway.

Might it be that there has been some sort of differential reproduction of But
they would be jumping to a conclusion. The existence of a universe
universes, with some varieties having more "offspring" than others? Hume's
obeying a set of laws even as elegant as the Life law (or the laws of our
own Philo toyed with this idea, as we saw in chapter 1: physics) does not
logically require an intelligent Lawgiver. Notice first how the actual history
of the Game of Life divided the intellectual labor in two: on And what
surprise must we entertain, when we find him a stupid mechanic, the one
hand there was the initial exploratory work that led to the physical who
imitated others, and copied an art, which, through a long succession law
promulgated by the Lawgiver, and on the other hand there was the of ages,
after multiplied trials, mistakes, corrections, deliberations, and engineering
work of the law-exploiters, the Artificers. These might have controversies,
had been gradually improving? Many worlds might have happened in that
temporal order—first Conway, in a stroke of inspired been botched and
bungled, throughout an eternity, ere this system was genius, promulgates
the physics of the Life world, and then he and his struck out: Much labour
lost: Many fruitless trials made: And a slow, but students design and build
the wonderful denizens of that world according to continued improvement
carried on during infinite ages of world-making.

the law laid down. But in fact the two tasks were intermixed; many trial-
and-

[Pt. V.]

error attempts to make things that were interesting provided the guidance
for Conway's legislative search. Notice, second, that this postulated division
of Hume imputes the "continued improvement" to the minimal selective
bias labor illustrates a fundamental Darwinian theme from the previous
chapter.

of a "stupid mechanic," but we can replace the stupid mechanic with The
task of the wise God required to put this world into motion is a task of
something even stupider without dissipating the lifting power: a purely
discovery, not creation, a job for a Newton, not a Shakespeare. What
Newton algorithmic Darwinian process of world-trying. Though Hume
obviously found—and what Conway found—are eternal Platonic fixed
points that didn't think this was anything but an amusing philosophical
fantasy, the idea anybody else in principle could have discovered, not
idiosyncratic creations has recently been developed in some detail by the
physicist Lee Smolin that depend in any way on the particularities of the
minds of their authors. If (1992). The basic idea is that the singularities
known as black holes are in Conway had never turned his hand to designing
cellular-automata worlds—if effect the birthplaces of offspring universes, in
which the fundamental phys-Conway had never even existed—some other
mathematician might very well ical constants would differ slightly, in
random ways, from the physical con-have hit upon exactly the Life world
that Conway gets the credit for. So, as stants in the parent universe. So,
according to Smolin's hypothesis, we have we follow the Darwinian down
this path, God the Artificer turns first into both differential reproduction and
mutation, the two essential features of any God the Lawgiver, who now can
be seen to merge with God the Lawfinder.

Darwinian selection algorithm. Those universes that just happened to have
God's hypothesized contribution is thereby becoming less personal—and
physical constants that encouraged the development of black holes would
hence more readily performable by something dogged and mindless!

ipso facto have more offspring, which would have more offspring, and so
Hume has already shown us how the argument runs, and now, bolstered by
forth—that's the selection step. Note that there is no grim reaper of
universes our experience with Darwinian thinking in more familiar terrain,

we can in this scenario; they all live and "die" in due course, but some
merely have more offspring. According to this idea, then, it is no mere
interesting coincidence that we live in a universe in which there are black
holes, nor is it an absolute logical necessity. It is, rather, the sort of
conditional near-his friends and colleagues in this quest. I have always
found the prospect of such a proof mouth-watering, but the paths to it are
totally beyond me. So far as I know, nothing necessity you find in any
evolutionary account. The link, Smolin claims, is substantive has yet been
published on this most interesting epistemological question, but carbon,
which plays a role both in the collapse of gaseous clouds (or in other I want
to encourage others to address it. The same thought experiment is posed,
inde-words, the birth of stars, a precursor to the birth of black holes) and, of
pendently, in Stewart and Golubitsky 1992, pp. 261-62.

course, in our molecular engineering.

178 PRIMING DARWIN'S PUMP

The Laws of the Game of Life 179

Is the theory testable? Smolin offers some predictions that would, if dis-we
need reproduction and selection if we are to traverse Vast spaces in non-
confirmed, pretty well eliminate his idea: it should be the case that all the
Vast amounts of time, but when time is no longer a limiting consideration,

"near" variations in physical constants from the values we enjoy should
yield selection is no longer a requirement. In die course of eternity, you can
go universes in which black holes are less probable or less frequent than in
our everywhere in the Library of Babel or the Library of Mendel—or the
Library own. In short, he thinks our universe should manifest at least a
local, if not of Einstein (all possible values of all die constants of physics)
—as long as global, optimum in die black-hole-making competition. The
trouble is that you keep moving. (Hume imagines an "actuating force" to
keep the shuffling there are too few constraints, so far as I can see, on what
should count as a going, and this reminds us of Locke's argument about
matter without motion,

"near" variation and why, but perhaps further elaboration on the theory will
but it does not suppose diat the actuating force has any intelligence at all.)
In clarify this. Needless to say, it is hard to know what to make of this idea
yet, fact, if you shuffle through all the possibilities for eternity, you will
pass but whatever the eventual verdict of scientists, the idea already serves
to through each possible place in these Vast (but finite) spaces not just once
but secure a philosophical point. Freeman Dyson and Fred Hoyle, among
many an infinity of times!

others, think they see a wonderful pattern in the laws of physics; if they or
Several versions of this speculation have been seriously considered by
anyone else were to make the tactical mistake of asking the rhetorical
physicists and cosmologists in recent years. John Archibald Wheeler (1974
), question "What else but God could possibly explain it?" Smolin would
have a for instance, has proposed diat the universe oscillates back and forth
for nicely deflating reply. (I advise my philosophy students to develop
eternity, a Big Bang is followed by expansion, which is followed by con-
hypersensitivity for rhetorical questions in philosophy. They paper over
traction into a Big Crunch, which is followed by another Big Bang, and so
whatever cracks there are in the arguments.)

fordi forever, with random variations in the constants and odier crucial But
suppose, for the sake of argument, that Smolin's speculations are all
parameters occurring in each oscillation. Each possible setting is tried an
flawed; suppose selection of universes doesn't work after all. There is a
infinity of times, and so every variation on every theme, both those diat
weaker, semi-Darwinian speculation that also answers the rhetorical
question

"make sense" and those diat are absurd, spins itself out, not once but an
handily. Hume toyed with this weaker idea, too, as we already noted, in part
infinity of times.

VIII of his Dialogues-.

It is hard to believe that this idea is empirically testable in any meaningful
way, but we should reserve judgment. Variations or elaborations on the
Instead of supposing matter infinite, as Epicurus did, let us suppose it finite.

theme just might have implications that could be confirmed or discon-A
finite number of particles is only susceptible of finite transpositions: And
firmed. In die meantime, it is worth noting diat tiiis family of hypotiieses it
must happen, in an eternal duration, that every possible order or position
does have the virtue of extending die principles of explanation diat work so
must be tried an infinite number of times __

well in testable domains all the way out. Consistency and simplicity are in
its Suppose ... that matter were thrown into any position, by a blind, favor.
And diat, once again, is certainly enough to blunt die appeal of the
unguided force; it is evident that this first position must in all probability
traditional alternative.9

be die most confused and most disorderly imaginable, without any resem-
Anybody who won a coin-tossing tournament would be tempted to think
blance to those works of human contrivance, which, along with a symme-he
was blessed widi magical powers, especially if he had no direct knowl-try
of parts, discover an adjustment of means to ends and a tendency to edge of
die odier players. Suppose you were to create a ten-round coin-self-
preservation— Suppose, that the actuating force, whatever it be, still
continues in matter— Thus the universe goes on for many ages in a tossing
tournament without letting each of the 1,024 "contestants" realize he
continued succession of chaos and disorder. But is it not possible that it was
entered in a tournament. You say to each one as you recruit him.-

may settle at last... ? May we not hope for such a position, or rather be

"Congratulations, my friend. I am Mephistopheles, and I am going to
bestow assured of it, from the eternal revolutions of unguided matter, and
may not great powers on you. Witii me at your side, you are going to win
ten this account for all the appearing wisdom and contrivance which is in
the universe?

This idea exploits no version of selection at all, but simply draws attention
9. For a more detailed analysis of these issues, and a defense of a "neo-
PIatonist" middle ground, see J. Leslie 1989. (Like most middle grounds,
this is not likely to appeal to either to the fact that we have eternity to play
with. There is no five-billion-year the devout or the skeptical, but it is at

least an ingenious attempt at a compromise.) Van deadline in this instance,
the way there is for the evolution of life on Earth.

Inwagen (199 3a, chh. 7 and 8 ) provides a clear and relentless analysis of
the arguments—

As we saw in our consideration of the Libraries of Babel and Mendel,
Leslie's, but also the arguments I have presented here—from a position of
unusual neutrality. Anyone less than satisfied with my treatment should turn
to this source first.

180 PRIMING DARWIN'S PUMP

Eternal Recurrence—Life Without Foundations? 181

consecutive coin-tosses without a loss!" You then arrange for your dupes to
exists" is probably as good an answer as any, but look at its competition:
meet, pairwise, until you have a final winner. (You never let the contestants

"Why not?"

discuss your relation to them, and you kiss off the 1,02 3 losers along the
way with some sotto voce gibe to the effect that they were pretty gullible to
believe your claim about being Mephistopheles!) The winner—and there
must be one—will certainly have been given evidence of being a Chosen 4.
ETERNAL RECURRENCE—LIFE WITHOUT FOUNDATIONS?

One, but if he falls for it, this is simply an illusion of what we might call
retrospective myopia. The winner doesn't see that the situation was struc-
Science is wonderful at destroying metaphysical answers, but incapable
tured so that somebody simply had to be the lucky one—and he just hap-of
providing substitute ones. Science takes away foundations without pened to
be it.

providing a replacement. Whether we want to be there or not, science Now
if the universe were structured in such a way that an infinity of has put us in
a position of having to live without foundations. It was different "laws of
physics" got tried out in the fullness of time, we would be shocking when

Nietzsche said this, but today it is commonplace; our succumbing to the
same temptation were we to draw any conclusions about historical position
— and no end to it is in sight— is that of having to the laws of nature being
prepared especially for us. This is not an argument philosophize without
'foundations'.

for the conclusion that the universe is, or must be, so structured, but just for

—HIIARY PUTNAM 1987, p. 29

the more modest conclusion that no feature of the observable "laws of
nature" could be invulnerable to this alternative, deflationary interpretation.

The sense that the meaning of the universe had evaporated was what Once
these ever more speculative, ever more attenuated Darwinian hy-seemed to
escape those who welcomed Darwin as a benefactor of potheses are
formulated, they serve—in classic Darwinian fashion—to di-mankind.
Nietzsche considered that evolution presented a correct pic-minish by small
steps the explanatory task facing us. All that is left over in ture of the world,
but that it was a disastrous picture. His philosophy need of explanation at
this point is a certain perceived elegance or won-was an attempt to produce
a new world-picture which took Darwinism derfulness in the observed laws
of physics. If you doubt that the hypothesis into account but was not
nullified by it.

of an infinity of variant universes could actually explain this elegance, you

—R. J. HOLLINGDALE 1965, p. 90

should reflect that this has at least as much claim to being a non-question-
begging explanation as any traditional alternative; by the time God has been
In the wake of Darwin's publication of Origin of Species, Friedrich
depersonalized to the point of being some abstract and timeless principle of
Nietzsche rediscovered what Hume had already toyed with: the idea that an
beauty or goodness, it is hard to see how the existence of God could explain
eternal recurrence of blind, meaningless variation—chaotic, pointless shuf-
anything. What would be asserted by the "explanation" that was not already

fling of matter and law—would inevitably spew up worlds whose evolution
given in the description of the wonderful phenomenon to be explained?

through time would yield the apparently meaningful stories of our lives.
This Darwin began his attack on the Cosmic Pyramid in the middle: Give
me idea of eternal recurrence became a cornerstone of his nihilism, and thus
part Order, and time, and I will explain Design. We have now seen how the
of the foundation of what became existentialism.

downward path of universal acid flows: if we give his successors Chaos (in
The idea that what is happening now has all happened before must be as the
old-fashioned sense of pure meaningless randomness), and eternity, they old
as the dejd-vu phenomenon that so often inspires superstitious versions of
will explain Order—the very Order needed to account for the Design. Does
it. Cyclical cosmogonies are not uncommon in the catalogue of human utter
Chaos in turn need an explanation? What is there left to explain? Some
cultures. But when Nietzsche hit upon a version of Hume's—and John
people think there is still one leftover "why" question: Why is there
Archibald Wheeler's—vision, he took it to be much more than an amusing
something rather than nothing? Opinions differ on whether the question
thought experiment or an elaboration of ancient superstitions. He thought—
at makes any intelligible demand at all.10 If it does, the answer "Because
God least for a while—he had stumbled upon a scientific proof of 10. For
an engaging examination of the question, see ch. 2 of Robert Nozick's
Philosoph-approach that stands a chance of yielding an answer will look
extremely weird. Someone ical Explanation. Nozick offers several different
candidate answers, all of them admit-who proposes a non-strange answer
shows he didn't understand the question" (Nozick tedly bizarre, but notes,
disarmingly. "The question cuts so deep, however, that any 1981, p. 116).

182 PRIMING DARWIN'S PUMP

Eternal Recurrence— Life Without Foundations? 183

the greatest importance.11 I suspect that Nietzsche was encouraged to take
What if a demon were to creep after you one day or night, in your loneliest
the idea more seriously than Hume had done by his dim appreciation of the

loneness, and say: "This life which you live and have lived, must be lived
tremendous power of Darwinian thinking.

again by you, and innumerable times more. And mere will be nothing new
Nietzsche's references to Darwin are almost all hostile, but there are quite in
it, but every pain and every joy and every thought and every sigh—

a few, and that in itself supports Walter Kaufmann's argument (1950,
everything unspeakably small and great in your life—must come again to
preface) that Nietzsche "was not a Darwinist, but only aroused from his
you, and in the same sequence and series __ " Would you not throw your
dogmatic slumber by Darwin, much as Kant was a century earlier by
Hume."

self down and curse the demon who spoke to you thus? Or have you once
experienced a tremendous moment, in which you would answer him:
Nietzsche's references to Darwin also reveal that his acquaintance with

"Thou art a god, and never have I heard anything more divine!" [The Gay
Darwin's ideas was beset with common misrepresentations and Science
(1882), p. 341 (passage translated in Danto 1965, p. 210).]

misunderstandings, so perhaps he "knew" Darwin primarily through the
enthusiastic appropriations of the many popularizers in Germany, and
indeed Is this message liberating, or horrifying? Nietzsche couldn't seem to
make throughout Europe. On the few points of specific criticism he
ventures, he up his own mind, perhaps because he often chose to clothe the
implications gets Darwin utterly wrong, complaining, for instance, that
Darwin has of his "most scientific of hypodtheses" in diese rather mystical
trappings. We ignored the possibility of "unconscious selection," when that
was one of can get a little fresh air into the discussion by considering a
delectable Darwin's most important bridging ideas in Origin. He refers to
the "complete parody version, by die novelist Tom Robbins, in Even
Cowgirls Get the betise in the Englishmen, Darwin and Wallace," and
complains, "At last, Blues:

confusion goes so far that one regards Darwinism as philosophy: and now
die scholars and scientists dominate" (Nietzsche 1901, p. 422). Others, For

Christmas that year, Julian gave Sissy a miniature Tyrolean village. The
however, regularly saw him as a Darwinian—"Other scholarly oxen have
craftsmanship was remarkable.

suspected me of Darwinism on this account" (Nietzsche 1889, III, i)—a
label There was a tiny cathedral whose stained-glass windows made fruit
salad which he scoffed at, while proceeding to write, in his Genealogy of
Morals of sunlight. There was a plaza and ein Biergarten. The Biergarten
got quite (1887), one of the first and still subdest of the Darwinian
investigations of noisy on Saturday nights. There was a bakery that smelled
always of hot the evolution of ethics, a topic to which we will return in
chapter 16.

bread and strudel. There was a town hall and a police station, with cutaway
Nietzsche viewed his argument for eternal recurrence as a proof of the
sections that revealed standard amounts of red tape and corruption. There
absurdity or meaninglessness of life, a proof that no meaning was given to
were little Tyroleans in leather britches, intricately stitched, and, beneath
the universe from on high. And this is undoubtedly the root of the fear that
the britches, genitalia of equally fine workmanship. There were ski shops
many experience when encountering Darwin, so let us examine it in and
many other interesting things, including an orphanage. The orphanage
Nietzsche's version, as extreme as any we are apt to find. Why, exacdy, was
designed to catch fire and burn down every Christmas Eve. Orphans would
eternal recurrence make life meaningless? Isn't it obvious?

would dash into the snow with their nightgowns blazing. Terrible. Around
the second week of January, a fire inspector would come and poke through
die ruins, muttering, "If they had only listened to me, those children would
be alive today." [Robbins 1976, pp. 191-92.]

11. For a clear reconstruction of Nietzsche's uncharacteristically careful
deduction of what he once described as "the most scientific of hypotheses,"
see Danto 1965, pp.

The craftsmanship of this passage is itself remarkable. The repetition of
201-9- For a discussion and survey of this and other interpretations of
Nietzsche's nothe orphanage drama year after year seems to rob the little

world of any real torious idea of eternal recurrence, see Nehamas 1980,
which argues that by "scientific"

meaning. But why? Why exactly should it be the repetition of the fire
Nietzsche meant specifically "not-teleological." A recurring—but, so far,
not eternally inspector's lament that makes it sound so hollow? Perhaps if
we looked recurring—problem with the appreciation of Nietzsche's version
of the eternal recur-closely at what that entails we would find the sleight of
hand that makes the rence is that, unlike Wheeler, Nietzsche seems to think
that this life will happen again not because it and all possible variations on
it will happen over and over, but because there passage "work." Do the little
Tyroleans rebuild the orphanage themselves, or is only one possible
variation—this one—and it will happen over and over. Nietzsche, in is there
a RESET button on this miniature village? What difference would that
short, seems to have believed in actualism. I think that this is inessential to
an appreci-make? Well, where do the new orphans come from? Do the
"dead" ones ation of the moral implications Nietzsche thought he could or
should draw from the idea, come back to life (Dennett 1984, pp. 9-10)?
Notice that Robbins says that the and perhaps to Nietzsche scholarship as
well (but what do I know?).

orphanage was designed to catch fire and burn down every Christmas 184
PRIMING DARWIN'S PUMP

Eternal Recurrence— Life Without Foundations? 185

Eve. The creator of this miniature world is clearly taunting us, ridiculing the
What does need its origin explained is the concrete universe itself, and as
seriousness with which we face our life problems. The moral seems clear: if
Hume's Philo long ago asked: Why not stop at the material world? It, we the
meaning of this drama must come from on high, from a Creator, it would
have seen, does perform a version of the ultimate bootstrapping trick; it be
an obscene joke, a trivialization of the strivings of the individuals in that
creates itself ex nihilo, or at any rate out of something that is well-nigh
world. But what if the meaning is somehow the creation of the individuals
indistinguishable from nothing at all. Unlike the puzzlingly mysterious,
time-themselves, arising anew in each incarnation rather than as a gift from
on less self-creation of God, this self-creation is a non-miraculous stunt that

has high? This might open up the possibility of meaning that was not
threatened left lots of traces. And, being not just concrete but the product of
an ex-by repetition.

quisitely particular historical process, it is a creation of utter uniqueness—

This is the defining theme of existentialism in its various species: the only
encompassing and dwarfing all the novels and paintings and symphonies of
meaning there can be is the meaning you (somehow) create for yourself.

all the artists—occupying a position in the hyperspace of possibilities that
How that trick might be accomplished has always been something of a
differs from all others.

mystery among existentialists, but as we shall soon see, Darwinism does
Benedict Spinoza, in the seventeenth century, identified God and Nature,
have some demystification to offer in its account of the process of meaning-
arguing that scientific research was the true path of theology. For this
heresy creation. The key, once again, is the abandonment of John Locke's
Mind-first he was persecuted. There is a troubling (or, to some, enticing)
Janus-faced vision, and its replacement with a vision in which importance
itself, like quality to Spinoza's heretical vision of Deus sive Natura (God, or
Nature): in everything else that we treasure, gradually evolves from
nothingness.

proposing his scientific simplification, was he personifying Nature or We
might pause, before turning to some of these details, to consider where
depersonalizing God? Darwin's more generative vision provides the
structure our roundabout journey has brought us so far. We began with a
somewhat in which we can see the intelligence of Mother Nature (or is it
merely childish vision of an anthropomorphic, Handicrafter God, and
recognized that apparent intelligence?) as a non-miraculous and non-
mysterious—and hence this idea, taken literally, was well on the road to
extinction. When we looked all the more wonderful—feature of this self-
creating thing.

through Darwin's eyes at the actual processes of design of which we and all
the wonders of nature are the products to date, we found that Paley was

right to see these effects as the result of a lot of design work, but we found a
non-CHAPTER 7: There must have been a first living thing, but there
couldn't have miraculous account of it: a massively parallel, and hence
prodigiously been one— the simplest living thing is too complex, too
designed, to spring wasteful, process of mindless, algorithmic design-
trying, in which, however, into existence by sheer chance. This dilemma is
solved not by a skyhook, but the minimal increments of design have been
thriftily husbanded, copied, and by a long series of Darwinian processes:
self-replicating macros, preceded re-used over billions of years. The
wonderful particularity or individuality of or accompanied perhaps by self-
replicating clay crystals, gradually the creation was due, not to
Shakespearean inventive genius, but to the advancing from tournaments of
luck to tournaments of skill over a billion incessant contributions of chance,
a growing sequence of what Crick (1968) years. And the regularities of
physics on which those cranes depend could has called "frozen accidents."

themselves be the outcome of a blind, uncaring shuffle through Chaos.
Thus, That vision of the creative process still apparently left a role for God
as out of next to nothing, the world we know and love created itself.

Lawgiver, but this gave way in turn to the Newtonian role of Lawfinder,
which also evaporated, as we have recently seen, leaving behind no Intel-
CHAPTER 8: The work done by natural selection is R and D, so biology is
ligent Agency in the process at all. What is left is what the process,
shuffling fundamentally akin to engineering, a conclusion that has been
deeply re-through eternity, mindlessly finds (when it finds anything): a
timeless Pla-sisted out of misplaced fear for what it might imply. In fact, it
sheds light on tonic possibility of order. That is indeed a thing of beauty, as
mathematicians some of our deepest puzzles. Once we adopt the
engineering perspective, the are forever exclaiming, but it is not itself
something intelligent but, wonder central biological concept of function
and the central philosophical concept of wonders, something intelligible.
Being abstract and outside of time, it is of meaning can be explained and
united. Since our own capacity to respond nothing with an initiation or
origin in need of explanation.

to and create meaning— our intelligence— is grounded in our status as
advanced products of Darwinian processes, the distinction between real
and artificial intelligence collapses. There are important differ-12.
Descartes had raised the question of whether God had created the truths of
mathematics. His follower Nicolas Malebranche ( 1638-1715) firmly
expressed the view that they needed no inception, being as eternal as
anything could be.

186 PRIMING DARWIN'S PUMP

ences, however, between the products of human engineering and the
products of evolution, because of differences in the processes that create
them. We are just now beginning to get the grand processes of evolution
into focus, by directing products of our own technology, computers, onto the
outstanding CHAPTER EIGHT

questions.

Biology Is Engineering

1. THE SCIENCES OF THE ARTIFICIAL

Since World War II the discoveries that have changed the world were not
made so much in lofty halls of theoretical physics as in the less-noticed labs
of engineering and experimental physics. The roles of pure and applied
science have been reversed; they are no longer what they were in the golden
age of physics, in the age of Einstein, Schrö-dinger, Fermi and Dirac....
Historians of science have seen fit to ignore the history of the great
discoveries in applied physics, engineering and computer science, where
real scientific progress is nowadays to be found. Computer science in
particular has changed and continues to change the face of the world more
thoroughly and more drastically than did any of the great discoveries in
theoretical physics.

—NICHOLAS METROPOLIS 1992

In this chapter I want to trace some of the overlooked and underappreciated
implications of a central—I venture to say the central—feature of the

Darwinian Revolution the marriage, after Darwin, of biology and
engineering. My goal in this chapter is to tell the positive side of the story
of biology as engineering. Later chapters will deal with various assaults and
challenges, but before they steal the limelight, I want to make out the case
that the engineering perspective on biology is not merely occasionally
useful, not merely a valuable option, but the obligatory organizer of all
Darwinian thinking, and the primary source of its power. I expect a fair
amount of emotional resistance to this claim. Be honest: doesn't this
chapter's title provoke a negative reaction in you, along the lines of "Oh no,
what a dreary, Philistine, reductionist claim! Biology is much more than
engineering!"?

The idea that a study of living forms is at least a close kin to engineering
has been available since Aristotle's own pioneering investigations of organ-
188 BIOLOGY IS ENGINEERING

The Sciences of the Artificial 189

isms, and his analysis of teleology, the fourth of his causes, but only since
reflexive extension of his idea to itself: the evolution of the Darwinian
Darwin has the idea begun to come into focus. It is quite explicit, of course,
memes about evolution has been not just accompanied, but positively sped
in the Argument from Design, which invites the observer to marvel at the
along, by competition between ideas. And as he hypothesized with regard to
cunning interplay of parts, the elegant planning and exquisite workmanship
organisms, "competition will generally be most severe between those forms
of the Artificer. But engineering has always had second-class status in the
which are most nearly related to each other" (Origin, p. 121). Biologists
intellectual world. From Leonardo da Vinci to Charles Babbage to Thomas
themselves have not been immune to the heritage of negative attitudes
Edison, the engineering genius has always been acclaimed but nevertheless
towards engineering, of course. What is the hankering after skyhooks, after
regarded with a certain measure of condescension by the mandarin elite of
all, but the fond hope that a miracle will somehow come along to lift us
science and the arts. Aristotle did not help matters by proposing a
distinction, above the cranes? Continued subliminal resistance to this
feature of Darwin's adopted by the medievals, between what was secundum

naturam, according fundamental idea has heightened controversy, impeded
comprehension, and to nature, and what was contra naturam, against
nature, artificial.

distorted expression—while at the same time propelling some of the most
Mechanisms—but not organisms—were contra naturam. Then there were
important challenges to Darwinism.

the things that were praeter naturam, or wnnatural (monsters and mutants),
In response to these challenges, Darwin's idea has grown stronger. Today
and die things that were super naturam—miracles (Gabbey 1993). How we
can see that not only Aristotle's divisions but also other cherished com-
could the study of what was against nature shed much light on the glories—

partmentalizations of science are threatened by its territorial expansion. The
yea, even the monsters and miracles—of nature?

Germans divide learning into Naturwissenschaften, the natural sciences,
and The fossil traces of this negative attitude are everywhere in our culture.

Geistesiwissenschaften, the sciences of mind, meaning, and culture, but this
For instance, in my own home discipline of philosophy, the subdiscipline
sharp divide—cousin to C. P. Snow's Two Cultures (1963)—is threatened
by known as philosophy of science has a long and respected history; many
of the prospect that an engineering perspective will spread from biology up
the most eminent and influential philosophers these days are philosophers
of through the human sciences and arts. If there is just one Design Space,
after science. There are excellent philosophers of physics, philosophers of
biology, all, in which the offspring of both our bodies and our minds are
united under philosophers of mathematics, and even of social science. I
have never even one commodious set of R-and-D processes, then these
traditional walls may heard anybody in the field described as a philosopher
of engineering—as if tumble.

there couldn't possibly be enough conceptual material of interest in Before
proceeding, I want to confront a suspicion. Since I have just engineering for
a philosopher to specialize in. But this is changing, as more granted that
Darwin himself didn't appreciate many of the issues that have to and more

philosophers come to recognize that engineering harbors some of be dealt
with if the theory of evolution by natural selection is to survive, isn't the
deepest, most beautiful, most important thinking ever done. (The title of
there something trivial or tautological about my claim that Darwin's idea
this section is taken from Herbert Simon's seminal book [1969] on these
survives all these challenges? No wonder it can keep on spreading, since it
topics.)

keeps on changing in response to new challenges! If my point were to
crown Darwin's great insight was that all the designs in the biosphere could
be the Darwin as author and hero, there would be merit to this suspicion,
but of products of a process that was as patient as it was mindless, an
"automatic"

course this is not primarily such an exercise of intellectual history. It doesn't
and gradual lifter in Design Space. In retrospect, we can see that Darwin
really matter to my main thesis whether Darwin himself even existed! He
himself could hardly have imagined, let alone supported with evidence, the
could be, like the Average Taxpayer, a sort of mythical Virtual Author, for
refinements and extensions of his idea that have permitted later Darwinians
all I care. (Some authorities place Homer in that category.) The actual to go
beyond his own cautious agnosticism about the origins of life itself, and
historical man does fascinate me; his curiosity, integrity, and stamina inspire
even the "design" of the physical Order his idea presupposed. He was in no
me; his personal fears and flaws make him lovable. But he is, in a way,
beside better position to characterize that Order than he was to describe the
the point. He had the good fortune to be the midwife for an idea that has a
constraints and powers of the hereditary mechanism; he just knew there had
life of its own, precisely because it does grow and change. Most ideas can't
to be such a mechanism, and it had to exploit the Order, whatever it was,
that do that.

made "descent with modification" not only possible but fruitful.

In fact, a great deal of rhetoric has been expended by partisans on both The
century-plus of subsequent focusing and extending of Darwin's great sides
of the controversies about whether Darwin himself—St. Charles, you idea
has been punctuated by controversy, amply illustrating, by the way, the

might call him—was a gradualist, an adaptationist, a catastrophist, a capital-
ist, a feminist. The answers to these questions are of considerable historical
190 BIOLOGY IS ENGINEERING

Darwin Is Dead— Long L ive Darwin! 191

interest in their own right, and if they are carefully divorced from questions
cremental hill-climbing (or "gradient ascent") has been deservedly popular.
It of ultimate justification, they can actually help us see what the scientific
has even been popular enough to motivate theorists to calculate its issues
really are. What various thinkers think they are doing—saving the
limitations, which are severe. For certain classes of problems—or, in other
world from one ism or another, or finding room for God in science, or
words, in certain types of landscape—simple hill-climbing is quite
impotent, combating superstition—often turns out to be at right angles to
the contri-for an intuitively obvious reason: the climbers get stuck on local
second-rate bution their campaigns actually succeed in making. We have
already seen summits instead of finding their way to the global summit, the
Mount Ever-instances of this, and more are in the offing. Probably no area
of scientific est of perfection. (The same limitations beset the method of
simulated research is driven by more hidden agendas than evolutionary
theory, and it annealing.) The Local Rule is fundamental to Darwinism; it is
equivalent to certainly will help to expose them, but nothing follows
directly from the fact the requirement that there cannot be any intelligent
(or "far-seeing" ) fore-that some people are trying desperately—whether
they realize it or not—to sight in the design process, but only ultimately
stupid opportunistic exploi-protect something evil or destroy something
evil. People sometimes get it tation of whatever lucky lifting happens your
way.

right in spite of having been driven by the most unpresentable hankerings.

What Eigen has shown is that this simplest Darwinian model of steady
Darwin was who he was, and thought what he thought, warts and all. And
improvement up a single slope of fitness to the optimal peak of perfection
now he is dead. Darwinism, on the other hand, has more than nine lives. It
just doesn't work to describe what goes on in molecular or viral evolution.

bids fair to being immortal.

The rate of adaptation by viruses ( and also of bacteria and other pathogens)
is measurably faster than the "classical" models predict—so fast that it
seems to involve illicit "look-ahead" by the climbers. So does this mean that
2. D

Darwinism must be abandoned? Not at all, for what counts as local depends
ARWIN IS DEAD—LONG LIVE DARWIN!

(not surprisingly) on the scale you use.

Eigen draws our attention to the fact that when viruses evolve, they don't I
have taken the section title from the title of the "Resume" with which go
single-file; they travel in huge herds of almost identical variants, a fuzzy-
Manfred Eigen ends his 1992 book. There is an unmistakable engineering
edged cloud in the Library of Mendel that Eigen calls a "quasi-species." We
flair to Eigen's thinking. His research is a sequence of biological
construction problems posed and solved: how do the materials get amassed
at the building already saw the unimaginably large cloud of Moby Dick
variants in the site, and how does the design get determined, and in what
order are the Library of Babel, but any actual library is likely to have more
than one or various parts assembled so that they don't fall apart before the
whole two variant editions of a book on its shelves, and in the case of a
really structure is completed? His claim is that the ideas he presents are
revolu-popular book like Moby Dick it is also likely to have multiple copies
of the tionary, but that after the revolution, Darwinism is not only alive and
well, same edition. Like actual Moby Dick collections, then, actual viral
clouds but strengthened. I want to explore this theme in more detail, since
we will include multiple identical copies but also multiple copies of minor
typo-see other versions of it that are nowhere near as clearcut as Eigen's.

graphical variants, and this fact has some implications, according to Eigen,
What is supposed to be revolutionary about Eigen's work? In chapter 3 we
that have been ignored by "classical" Darwinians. It is the shape of the
cloud looked at a fitness landscape with a single peak, and saw how the
Baldwin of variants that holds the key to the speed of molecular evolution.

Effect could turn a well-nigh-invisible telephone pole on a plain into Mount
A classical term among geneticists for the canonical version of a species
Fuji, with a steadily rising surrounding slope, so that no matter where in the
(analogous to the canonical text of Moby Dick ) is the wild type. It was
often space you started, you would eventually get to the summit if you
simply supposed by biologists that among the many different genotypes in a
pop-followed the Local Rule:

ulation, the pure wild type would predominate. Analogous would be the
claim that in any library collection of copies of Moby Dick, most copies will
Never step down; step up whenever possible.

be of the received or canonical edition—if there is one! But this doesn't
have to be the case for organisms any more than for books in libraries. In
fact, the The idea of a fitness landscape was introduced by Sewall Wright
(1932), wild type is really just an abstraction, like the Average Taxpayer,
and a and it has become a standard imagination prosthesis for evolutionary
the-population may contain no individuals at all that have exactly "the"
wild-type orists. It has proven its value in literally thousands of
applications, including genome. (Of course, the same is true of books—
scholars might debate for many outside of evolutionary theory. In Artificial
Intelligence, economics, years over the purity of a particular word in a
particular text, and until such and other problem-solving domains, the
model of problem-solving by in-debates were resolved, nobody could say
exactly what the ca-192 BIOLOGY IS ENGINEERING

Darwin Is Dead— Long Live Darwin! 193

nonical or wild-type text of that work was, but the identity of the work
would leading—usually—from one temporarily stable problem-setting to
another.

hardly be in jeopardy. James Joyce's Ulysses would be a good case in
point.) No sooner do you climb a peak than the whole landscape pitches and
billows Eigen points out that this distribution of the "essence" over a variety
of into a new mountain range and you start climbing all over again. In fact,
the nearly identical vehicles turns out to make that essence much more
movable, landscape is constantly shifting under your feet (if you are a

quasi-species of much more adaptable, especially in "rugged" fitness
landscapes, with viruses ).

multiple peaks and few smooth slopes. It permits the essence to send out
Now, this is really not as revolutionary as Eigen claims. Sewall Wright
efficient scouting parties into the neighboring hills and ridges, ignoring
himself, in his "shirting balance theory," tried to explain how multiple peaks
wasteful exploration of the valleys, and thereby vastly (not Vastly, but and
shifting landscapes would be traversable not by individual "wild-type"

enough to make a huge difference) enhancing its capacity to find higher
exemplars, but by various-sized populations of variants, and Ernst Mayr has
peaks, better optima, at some distance from its center, where the (virtual)
stressed for many years that "population thinking" is at the heart of Dar-
wild type sits.1

winism, something overlooked by geneticists at their peril. So Eigen has
The reasons it works are summarized by Eigen as follows: really not
revolutionized Darwinism but, rather—no small contribution—

created some theoretical innovations that clarify and strengthen underap-
Functionally competent mutants, whose selection values come close to
preciated and imperfectly formulated ideas that had been around for years.

that of the wild type (though remaining below it), reach far higher pop-
When Eigen (1992, p. 125) says, "The (quantitative) acceleration of
evolution ulation numbers than those that are functionally ineffective. An
asymmetric that this brings about is so great that it appears to the biologist
as a surprising spectrum of mutants builds up, in which mutants far
removed from the new quality, an apparent ability of selection to 'see
ahead', something that wild type arise successively from intermediates. The
population in such a would be viewed by classical Darwinians as the purest
heresy!" he is chain of mutants is influenced decisively by the structure of
the value indulging in a familiar form of overdramatization, ignoring the
many landscape. The value landscape consists of connected plains, hills,
and biologists who at least anticipated, and perhaps even fomented, his
"revo-mountain ranges. In the mountain ranges, the mutant spectrum is
widely lution."

scattered, and along ridges even distant relatives of the wild type appear
After all, when traditional Darwinian theorists postulate fitness landscapes
with finite [that is, not infinitesimal] frequency. It is precisely in the moun-
and then randomly sprinkle genotypes on them in order to calculate what
tainous regions that further selectively superior mutants can be expected.

As soon as one of these turns up on the periphery of a mutation spectrum
theory says would happen to them, they know that, in nature, genotypes
don't the established ensemble collapses. A new ensemble builds up around
the just get thrown randomly into pre-existing parts of the world. Every
model of superior mutant, which thus takes over the role of the wild
type___ This a time-consuming process has to start at some arbitrary
"moment"; the curtain causal chain results in a kind of 'mass action', by
which the superior mu-rises and the model then plots what happens next. If
we look at such a model tants are tested with much higher probability than
inferior mutants, even and see that at the "outset" it shows a bunch of
candidates down in the if the latter are an equal distance away from the
wild type. [Eigen 1992, valleys, we can be pretty sure that the theorist
recognizes that they weren't p. 25.]

"always" down there—whatever that would mean! Wherever on the fitness
landscape there are candidates at one time, there were peaks before, or
those So there is a tight interaction between the shape of the fitness
landscape candidates wouldn't be there, so these must be relatively new
valleys these and the population that occupies it, creating a series of
feedback loops, candidates are occupying, a new predicament that evolution
has placed before them. Only that assumption could justify locating the
candidates in the valleys in the first place. Eigen's contribution reinforces
the appreciation that we have to add these complications to the models if we
want them actually to 1. The similarity between these themes and the
themes I develop in Consciousness do the work that Darwinians have
always supposed that their simpler models Explained (1991a) about the
need to break up the Cartesian Theater, with its Central could do.

Meaner, and distribute its intelligence work around to a variety of
peripheral agents, is of course no accident. It is, however, mainly a case of
convergent evolution, so far as I can It is certainly no accident that our

appreciation of the need for these much determine. I had not read any of
Eigen's work at the time I was writing my book, though more complicated
models coincides in time (almost down to the month, and it certainly would
have inspired me if I had. A useful bridge between Eigen on molecules
certainly to the year) with our capacity to build and explore such models on
and me on consciousness is Schull 1990 on the intelligence of species, and
my commen-existing computers. No sooner do more powerful computers
become tary, Dennett 1990a.

available than we discover with their help that more complex 194
BIOLOGY IS ENGINEERING

Function and Specification 195

models of evolution are not only possible but positively required if we are
viruses to mutate in deadly combat with modern medicine that spurs on and
really to explain what Darwinism has always claimed it can explain.
Darwin's funds much of this research. (The AIDS virus has undergone so
much mu-idea that evolution is an algorithmic process is now becoming an
ever more tation in the last decade that its history over that period exhibits
more genetic enriched family of hypotheses, undergoing its own population
explosion diversity—measured in codon revisions—than is to be found in
the entire thanks to the opening up of new environments for it to live in.

history of primate evolution!)

In Artificial Intelligence, a prized strategy is to work on deliberately The
research of Eigen and hundreds of others has definite practical ap-
simplified versions of the phenomena of interest. These are engagingly
called plications for all of us. It is fitting to observe, then, that this
important work

"toy problems." In the Tinker Toy world of molecular biology, we get to see
is an instance of Darwinism triumphant, reductionism triumphant, mecha-
the simplest versions of the fundamental Darwinian phenomena in action,
but nism triumphant, materialism triumphant. It is also, however, the
farthest these are real toy problems! We can take advantage of the relative
simplicity thing from greedy reductionism. It is a breathtaking cascade of

levels upon and purity of this lowest-level Darwinian theory to introduce
and illustrate levels upon levels, with new principles of explanation, new
phenomena some of the themes that we will trace through the higher levels
of evolution appearing at each level, forever revealing that the fond hope of
explaining in later chapters.

"everything" at some one lower level is misguided. Here is Eigen's own
Evolutionists have always helped themselves to claims about fitness and
summary of what his survey shows; you will note that it is written in terms
optimality and the growth of complexity, for instance, and these claims
have that should be congenial to the most ardent critic of reductionism:
been recognized by claimant and critic alike to be serious
oversimplifications at best. In the world of molecular evolution, no such
apologies are required.

Selection is more like a particularly subtle demon that has operated on the
When Eigen speaks of optimality, he has a crisp definition of what he
means, different steps up to life, and operates today at the different levels of
life, and experimental measurements to back him up and keep him honest.
His with a set of highly original tricks. Above all, it is highly active, driven
by fitness landscapes and measures of success are neither subjective nor ad
hoc.

an internal feedback mechanism that searches in a very discriminating
Molecular complexity can be measured in several mutually supporting and
manner for the best route to optimal performance, not because it possesses
objective ways, and there is no poetic license at all in Eigen's use of the
term an inherent drive towards any predestined goal, but simply by virtue of
its

"algorithm." When we envision a proofreading enzyme, for instance,
inherent non-linear mechanism, which gives the appearance of goal-
chugging along a pair of DNA strands, checking and fixing and copying
and directedness. [Eigen 1992, p. 123]

then moving one step along and repeating the process, we can hardly doubt
that we are watching a microscopic automaton at work, and the best

simulations match the observed facts so closely that we can be very sure
there 3. FUNCTION AND SPECIFICATION

are no magical helper-elves, no skyhooks, lurking in these quarters. In the
world of molecules, the application of Darwinian thinking is particularly
pure Shape is destiny in the world of macromolecules. A one-dimensional
se-and unadulterated. Indeed, when we adopt this vantage point, it can seem
quence of amino acids (or of the nucleotide codons that code for them)
something of a marvel that Darwinian theory, which works so beautifully
on determines the identity of a protein, but the sequence only partially
constrains molecules, applies at all to such ungainly—galactic-sized—
conglomerations the way this one-dimensional protein string folds itself up.
It typically springs of cells as birds and orchids and mammals. (We don't
expect the periodic into just one of many possible shapes, an
idiosyncratically shaped snarl that table to enlighten us about corporations
or nations, so why would we expect its sequence type almost always
prefers. This three-dimensional shape is the Darwinian evolutionary theory
to work on such complexities as ecosystems source of its power, its
capacity as a catalyst—as a builder of structures or a or mammalian
lineages!?)

fighter of antigens or a regulator of development, for instance. It is a In
macroscopic biology—the biology of everyday-sized organisms such as
machine, and what it does is a very strict function of the shape of its parts.
Its ants and elephants and redwood trees—everything is untidy. Mutation
and overall three-dimensional shape is much more important, functionally,
than selection can usually only be indirectly and imperfectly inferred,
thanks to a the one-dimensional sequence that is responsible for it. The
important protein mind-boggling array of circumstantial complications. In
the molecular world, lysozyme, for instance, is a particular-shaped
molecular machine that is mutation and selection events can be directly
measured and manipulated, and produced in many different versions—more
than a hundred different amino-the generation time for viruses is so short
that huge Darwinian effects can be acid sequences have been found in
nature that fold into the same functional studied. For instance, it is the
horrifying capacity of toxic shape—and of course differences in these
amino-196 BIOLOGY IS ENGINEERING

Function and Specification 197

OceanofPDF.com

acid sequences can be used as "philological" clues in re-creating the evo-
terized most generally and abstracdy as information, and only the combi-
lutionary history of the production and use of lysozyme.

nation of information from the code and the code-reading environment And
here is a puzzle, first noted by Walter Elsasser (1958, 1966), but quite
suffices to create an organism.3 As we noted in chapter 5, some critics have
conclusively solved by Jacques Monod (1971). Considered very abstractly,
fastened on this fact as if it were somehow the refutation of "gene
centrism,"

the fact that a one-dimensional code can be "for" a three-dimensional the
doctrine that the DNA is the sole information store for inheritance, but
structure shows that information is added. Indeed, value is added. The that
idea was always only a handy oversimplification. Though libraries are
individual amino acids have value (by contributing to the functional
prowess commonly allowed to be storehouses of information, of course it is
really of a protein) not just in virtue of their location in the one-dimensional
only libraies-plus readers that preserve and store the information. Since
sequence that forms the string, but in virtue of their location in three-
libraries have not—up till now, at any rate—contained among their volumes
dimensional space once the string is folded up.

the information needed to create more readers, their capacity to store
information (effectively) has been dependent on there being another Thus
there is a seeming contradiction between the statement that the information-
storage system—the human genetic system, of which DNA is the genome
'entirely defines' the function of a protein and the fact that this principle
medium. When we apply the same reasoning to DNA itself, we see function
is linked to a three-dimensional structure whose data content is that it, too,
requires a continuing supply of "readers" that it does not itself richer than
the direct contribution made to the structure by the genome.

entirely specify. Where does the rest of the information come from to
specify

[Monod 1971, p. 94.]

these readers? The short answer is that it comes from the very continuities
of the environment—the persistence in the environment of the necessary
raw As Küppers (1990, p. 120) points out, Monod's solution is
straightforward: (and partially constructed) materials, and the conditions in
which they can be

"The seemingly irreducible, or excess, information is contained in the
exploited. Every time you make sure that your dishrag gets properly dry in
specific conditions of the protein's environment, and only together with
these between uses, you break the chain of environmental continuity (e.g.,
lots of can the genetic information determine unambiguously the structure
and thus moisture) that is part of the informational background presupposed
by the the function of the protein molecule." Monod (1971, p. 94) puts it
this way: DNA of the bacteria in the dishrag whose demise you seek.

We see here a special case of a very general principle: any functioning

... of all the structures possible only one is actually realized. Initial con-
structure carries implicit information about the environment in which its
ditions hence enter among the items of information finally enclosed within
function "works." The wings of a seagull magnificently embody principles
of the ... structure. Without specifying it, they contribute to the realization
aerodynamic design, and thereby also imply that the creature whose wings
of a unique shape by eliminating all alternative structures, in this way these
are is excellently adapted for flight in a medium having the specific
proposing—or rather imposing—an unequivocal interpretation of a poten-
density and viscosity of the atmosphere within a thousand meters or so of
the tially equivocal message.2

surface of the Earth. Recall the example in chapter 5 of sending the score of
Beethoven's Fifth Symphony to "Martians." Suppose we carefully preserved
What does this mean? It means—not surprisingly—that the language of the
body of a seagull and sent it off into space (without any accompanying
DNA and the "readers" of that language have to evolve together; neither can
explanation), to be discovered by these Martians. If they work on its own.
When the deconstructionists say that the reader brings something to the
text, they are saying something that applies just as surely to DNA as to
poetry; the something that the reader brings can be charac-3. David Haig

(personal communication) has drawn my attention to a fascinating new
wrinkle in this unfolding story about folding proteins: molecular
chaperones. "Chaperones are molecular cranes par excellence. They are
proteins with which an amino acid 2. Philosophers will recognize, I trust,
that Monod thus both posed and solved chain associates while it is folding
that allows the chain to adopt a conformation that Putnam's (1975) problem
of Twin Earth, at least in the context of the "toy problem" of would be
unavailable in the absence of the chaperone. The chaperone is then
discarded molecular evolution. Meaning "ain't in the head," as Putnam
famously observed, and it by the folded protein. Chaperones are highly
conserved.... Molecular chaperones were ain't (all) in the DNA either. Twin
Earth, otherwise known as the problem of broad named by analogy to the
functions of chaperones at a debutante ball: their role was to versus narrow
content, will get exhumed briefly in chapter 14, so I can give it its proper
encourage some interactions and to discourage others." For recent details,
see Martin et Darwinian funeral.

al. 1993, Ellis and van der Vies 1991.

198 BIOLOGY IS ENGINEERING

Function and Specification 199

made the fundamental assumption that the wings were functional, and that
selection competition; this was not, however, because symmetry is— a
priori—an their function was flight (which might not be as obvious to them
as we, who indispensable requirement for the fulfillment of a functional
purpose." [Küppers have seen them do it, think), they could use this
assumption to "read off' the 1990, p. 119, incorporating a quotation from
Eigen and Winkler-Oswatitsch implicit information about an environment
for which these wings would be 1975.]

well designed. Suppose they then asked themselves how all this
aerodynamic theory came to be implicit in the structure, or, in other words:
How did all But what about the asymmetric or chiral shapes? Is there a
reason why this information get into these wings? The answer must be: By
an interaction they should be one way—left-handed, say—rather than the
other? No, prob-between the environment and the seagull's ancestors. (

Dawkins 1983a ably not, but: "Even if there is no a priori physical
explanation for the explores these issues in more detail.)

decision, even if it was just a brief fluctuation that gave one or the other
The same principle applies at the most basic level, where the function is
equivalent possibility a momentary advantage, the self-reinforcing character
specification itself, the function on which all other functions depend. When
of selection would turn the random decision into a major and permanent we
wonder, with Monod, how the three-dimensional shape of the proteins
breach of symmetry. The cause would be a purely 'historical' one" (Eigen
gets fixed, given that the information in the genome must underspecify
them, 1992, p. 35 ).5

we see that only a pruning of the nonfunctional (or less functional) could
The shared chirality of organic molecules (in our part of the universe ) was
explain it. So the acquisition of a particular shape by a molecule involves a
thus probably another pure QWERTY phenomenon, or what Crick (1968)
has mixture of historical accident on the one hand and the "discovery" of
called a "frozen accident." But even in the case of such a QWERTY

important truths on the other.

phenomenon, if the conditions are just right and the opportunities and hence
From the outset, the process of the design of molecular "machines" ex-
pressures are great enough, the tables might be turned and a new standard
hibits these two features of human engineering. Eigen (1992, p. 34)
provides established. This is apparently just what happened when the DNA
language a good instance of this in his reflections on the structure of the
DNA code.

displaced the RNA language as the lingua franca of encoding for complex

"One might well ask why Nature has used four symbols, when she might
just organisms. The reasons for its preferability are clear: by being double-
as well have made do with two." Why indeed? Notice how naturally and
stranded, the DNA language permitted a system of error-correcting or
inevitably a "why" question arises at this point, and notice that it calls for an
proofreading enzymes, which could repair copying errors in one strand by

"engineering" answer. Either the answer is that there is no reason—it is
reference to its mate. This made the creation of longer, more complicated
historical accident, pure and simple—or there is a reason: a condition was
or genomes feasible (Eigen 1992, p. 36).

is present that makes this the right way or best way for the coding system to
Note that this reasoning does not yield the conclusion that double-stranded
get designed, given the conditions that obtained.4

DNA must develop, for Mother Nature had no advance intention to create
All the deepest features of molecular design may be considered from the
multicellular life. It just reveals that // double-stranded DNA happens to
engineering perspective. On the one hand, consider the fact that macro-
begin to develop, it opens up opportunities that are dependent on it. Hence
it molecules come in two basic shape categories: symmetrical and chiral
(with becomes a necessity for those exemplars in the space of all possible
life left-handed and right-handed versions). There is a reason why so many
forms that avail themselves of it, and if those life forms prevail should be
symmetrical:

The selective advantage in a symmetrical complex is enjoyed by all the
subunits, while in an asymmetric complex the advantage is only effective 5.
Danny Hillis, the creator of the Connection Machine, once told me a story
about some in the subunit in which the mutation arises. It is for this reason
that we find computer scientists who designed an electronic component for
a military application (I so many symmetric structures in biology, "because
they were able to make think it was part of a guidance system in airplanes).
Their prototype had two circuit the most effective use of their advantage,
and thus— a posteriori—won the boards, and the top one kept sagging, so,
casting about for a quick fix, they spotted a brass doorknob in the lab which
had just the right thickness. They took it off its door and jammed it into
place between the two circuit boards on the prototype. Sometime later, one
of these engineers was called in to look at a problem the military was
having with the 4. Eigen suggests that there is a reason why there are four
letters, not two, but I am not actual manufactured systems, and found to his
amazement that between the circuit going to pass it on. Perhaps you can

figure out for yourself what it might be before seeing boards in each unit
was a very precisely milled brass duplicate of the original doorknob.

what Eigen says. You already have at your fingertips the relevant principles
of engineering This is an Ur-story that has many well-known variations in
engineering circles and among to give it a good shot.

evolutionary biologists. For instance, see Primo Levi's amusing account of
the mystery of the varnish additive in The Periodic Table ( 1984).

200 BIOLOGY IS ENGINEERING

Original Sin and the Birth of Meaning 201

over those that do not avail themselves of it, that yields a retroactive en-
wished, as the truth that confirms the identify of Adam the Protobacterium.

dorsement of this raison d'etre of the DNA language. This is the way evo-
We can sharpen up the conditions on being the First Living Thing however
lution always discovers reasons—by retroactive endorsement.

we like, but when we then get in our time machine and go back to witness
the moment, we find that Adam the Protobacterium, no matter how we have
defined it, is probably as undistinguished as Mitochondrial Eve. We know
as a matter of logic that there was at least one start that has us as its contin-
4. ORIGINAL SIN AND THE BIRTH OF MEANING

uation, but there were probably many false starts that differed in no
interesting way at all from the one that initiated the winning series. The title
of The road to wisdom?

Adam is, once again, a retrospective honor, and we make a fundamental
Well, it's plain and simple to express:

mistake of reasoning if we ask, In virtue of what essential difference is this
Err and err and err again

the beginning of life? There need be no difference at all between Adam and
but less and less and less.

Badam, an atom-for-atom duplicate of Adam who just happened not to have

- Piet Hein

founded anything of note. This is not a problem for Darwinian theory; this
is a source of its power. As Küppers puts it ( 1990, p. 133), "The fact that
we The solution to the problem of life is seen in the vanishing of this
problem.

obviously are not in a position to give a comprehensive definition of the

—LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN 1922, prop. 6.521

phenomenon 'life' speaks not against but indeed for the possibility of a
completely physical explanation of life phenomena."

Once upon a time, there was no mind, and no meaning, and no error, and
Exactly the same gratuitous predicament faces anyone who, despairing of
no function, and no reasons, and no life. Now all these wonderful things
defining something as complicated as life, decides to define the apparently
exist. It has to be possible to tell the story of how they all came to exist, and
simpler notion of function or teleology. At exactly what point does function
that story must pass, by subtle increments, from elements that manifestly
lack make its appearance? Did the very first nucleotides have functions, or
did the marvelous properties to elements that manifestly have them. There
will they just have causal powers? Did Cairns-Smith's clay crystals exhibit
gen-have to be isthmuses of dubious or controversial or just plain unclas-
sifiable uine teleological properties, or just "as if teological properties? Do
gliders in intermediates. All these wonderful properties must have come
into existence the Life world have the function of locomotion, or do they just
move? It gradually, by steps that are barely discernible even in retrospect.

doesn't make any difference how you legislate the answer; the interesting
Recall that in the previous chapter it seemed to be obvious, maybe even a
world of functioning mechanisms has to start with mechanisms that
"straddle truth of logic, that either there had to be a First Living Thing or
there had to the line," and, however far back you place the line, there will
be precursors be an infinite regress of Living Things. Neither horn of the

dilemma would that differ in arguably nonessential ways from the anointed
ones.6

do, of course, and the standard Darwinian solution, which we will see over
Nothing complicated enough to be really interesting could have an es-and
over again, was this: in its place we described a finite regress, in which
sence.7 This anti-essentialist theme was recognized by Darwin as a truly the
sought-for marvelous property (life, in this case) was acquired by slight,
perhaps even imperceptible, amendments or increments.

Here is the most general form of the schema of Darwinian explanation.

The task of getting from the early time when there wasn't any x to the later
6. See Bedau 1991 for an exploration of this point that arrives at a
somewhat different time when there is lots of x is completed by a finite
series of steps in which it destination, and Linger 1990 for arguments that
go directly counter to it. Linger insists we have conventions such that there
must be (on logical grounds) "straddle pairs" in such becomes less and less
clear that "there still isn't any x here, not really,"

circumstances, such that one is the last item in the series to lack x and the
other is the through a series of "debatable" steps until we eventually find
ourselves on first in the series to have x. But as van Inwagen (1993b)
observes, a more inviting steps where it is really quite obvious that "of
course there is x, lots of x" We conclusion is: so much the worse for those
conventions.

never draw any lines.

7. These are fighting words for some philosophers. For a clear attempt to
salvage a formal Notice what happens in the particular case of the origin of
life if we try to logic of essences that specifically addresses the problems
raised by the complexity of draw the line. There are a slew of truths—no
doubt largely unknowable in artifacts and organisms, see Forbes 1983,
1984. The conclusion I draw from Forbes' work detail by us—any one of
which we could "in principle" identify, if we is that it constructs what may
be a Pyrrhic victory over Quine's staunch skepticism about essences, but in
the process it confirms his underlying warning: contrary to what you might

think, there is nothing natural about essentialist thinking; seeing the world
through essentialist glasses does not at all make your life easy.

202 BIOLOGY IS ENGINEERING

Original Sin and the Birth of Meaning 203

revolutionary epistemological or metaphysical accompaniment to his
science; even gets the cell to carry out its replication; its only contribution is
one we should not be surprised by how hard it is for people to swallow.
Ever protein factor, specially adapted for the viral RNA. This enzyme does
not since Socrates taught Plato (and all the rest of us) how to play the game
of become active until a 'password' on the viral RNA is shown. When it
sees asking for necessary and sufficient conditions, we have seen the task of
this, it reproduces the viral RNA with great efficiency, while ignoring the

"defining your terms" as a proper preamble to all serious investigations, and
very much greater number of RNA molecules of the host cell. Conse-this
has sent us off on interminable bouts of essence-mongering.8 We want to
quently the cell is soon flooded with viral RNA. This is packed into the
draw lines; we often need to draw lines—just so we can terminate or
forestall virus' coat protein, which is also synthesized in large quantities,
and finally the cell bursts and releases a multitude of progeny virus
particles. All this sterile explorations in a timely fashion. Our perceptual
systems are even is a programme that runs automatically and is rehearsed
down to the genetically designed to force straddling candidates for
perception into one smallest detail. [Eigen 1992, p. 40.]

classification or another (Jackendoff 1993), a Good Trick but not a forced
move. Darwin shows us that evolution does not need what we need; the real
world can get along just fine with the de facto divergences that emerge over
Love it or hate it, phenomena like this exhibit the heart of the power of the
time, leaving lots of emptiness between clusters of actuality.

Darwinian idea. An impersonal, unreflective, robotic, mindless little scrap
of We have just glanced briefly at a particularly important instance of this
molecular machinery is the ultimate basis of all the agency, and hence

characteristic Darwinian explanatory schema, and we should pause to con-
meaning, and hence consciousness, in the universe.

firm the effect. Through the microscope of molecular biology, we get to
Right from the beginning, the cost of doing something is running the risk of
witness the birth of agency, in the first macromolecules that have enough
doing it wrong, of making a mistake. Our slogan could be: No taking
without complexity to "do things." This is not florid agency— echt
intentional action, mistaking. The first error that ever was made was a
typographical error, a with the representation of reasons, deliberation,
reflection, and conscious copying mistake that then became the opportunity
for creating a new task decision—but it is the only possible ground from
which the seeds of inten-environment ( or fitness landscape ) with a new
criterion of right and wrong, tional action could grow. There is something
alien and vaguely repellent better and worse. A copying error "counts" as an
error here only because there about the quasi-agency we discover at this
level—all that purposive hustle is a cost to getting it wrong: termination of
the reproductive line at worst, or a and bustle, and yet there's nobody home.
The molecular machines perform diminution in the capacity to replicate.
These are all objective matters, their amazing stunts, obviously exquisitely
designed, and just as obviously differences that are there whether or not we
look at them, or care about them, none the wiser about what they are doing.
Consider this account of the but they bring in their train a new perspective.
Before that moment, no activity of an RNA phage, a replicating virus:

opportunity for error existed. However things went, they went neither right
nor wrong. Before that moment, there was no stable, predictive way of First
of all, the virus needs a material in which to pack and protect its own
exercising the option of adopting the perspective from which errors might
be genetic information. Secondly, it needs a means of introducing its infor-
discerned, and every mistake anybody or anything has ever made since is
mation into the host cell. Thirdly, it requires a mechanism for the specific
dependent on that original error-making process. In fact, there is strong
replication of its information in the presence of a vast excess of host cell
selection pressure for making the genetic copying process as high-fidelity
as RNA. Finally, it must arrange for the proliferation of its information, a
possible, minimizing the likelihood of error. Fortunately, it cannot quite

process that usually leads to the destruction of the host cell.... The virus
achieve perfection, for if it did, evolution would grind to a halt. This is
Original Sin, in scientifically respectable guise. Like the Biblical version, it
purports to explain something: the emergence of a new level of phenomena
with special characteristics ( meaners in one case, sinners in the other).

8. One of the major themes of the German philosopher Martin Heidegger
was that Unlike the Biblical version, it provides an explanation that makes
sense; it Socrates is to blame for much of what is wrong with philosophy,
because he taught us all does not proclaim itself to be a mysterious fact that
one has to take on faith, to demand necessary and sufficient conditions. It
cannot be often that Darwin and and it has testable implications.

Heidegger support each other, so the occasion is worth noting. Hubert
Dreyfus has long Notice that one of the first fruits of the perspective from
which error is maintained (e.g., 1972, 1979) that Artificial Intelligence is
based on a failure to appreciate Heidegger's critique of Socrates, and though
that may be true of some strands of AI, discernible is a clarification of the
concept of a species. When we consider all it is not true of the field in
general, which is firmly with Darwin, a claim that I will defend the actual
genomic texts that get created in the process of copying, copying, later in
this chapter, and in greater detail in chapters 13 to 15.

copying—with occasional mutations—nothing intrinsically 204 BIOLOGY
IS ENGINEERING

Original Sin and the Birth of Meaning 205

counts as a canonical version of anything. That is, although we can identify
never be pulled apart, that there could never be meaning where there was no
mutations by simply comparing the "before" sequence with the "after"

mind, or mind where there was no meaning. Intentionality is the phi-
sequence, there is no intrinsic way of telling which of the uncorrected
losopher's technical term for this meaning; it is the "aboutness" that can
relate typographical errors might more fruitfully be viewed as editorial
improve-one thing to another—a name to its bearer, an alarm call to the
danger that ments.9 Most mutations are what engineers would call "don't-

cares," vari-triggered it, a word to its referent, a thought to its object.11
Only some things ations that make no discernible difference to viability, but
as selection in the universe manifest intentionality. A book or a painting can
be about a gradually takes its toll, the better versions begin to cluster. It is
only relative mountain, but a mountain itself is not about anything. A map
or a sign or a to a "wild type" (a center of gravity, in effect, of such a
cluster) that we can dream or a song can be about Paris, but Paris is not
about anything.

identify a particular version as a mistaken version, and even then there is
the Intentionality is widely regarded by philosophers as the mark of the
mental.

possibility, remote in practice but omnipresent in principle, that what seems
a Where does intentionality come from? It comes from minds, of course.

mistake from the perspective of one wild type is a brilliant improvement
from But that idea, perfectly good in its own way, becomes a source of
mystery the perspective of a wild-type-in-the-making. And as new wild
types emerge and confusion when it is used as a metaphysical principle,
rather than a fact as the foci or summits of fitness landscapes, the direction
of the steady of recent natural history. Aristotle called God the Unmoved
Mover, the pressure of error correction can reverse in any particular
neighborhood of source of all motion in the universe, and Locke's version
of Aristotelian Design Space. Once a particular family of similar texts is no
longer subject to doctrine, as we have seen, identifies this God as Mind,
turning the Unmoved

"correction" relative to a receding or lapsed norm, it is free to wander into
the Mover into the Unmeant Meaner, the source of all Intentionality. Locke
took attractive basin of a new norm.10 Reproductive isolation is thus both a
cause himself to be proving deductively what the tradition already took to
be and an effect of the clumpiness of phenotypic space. Wherever there are
obvious: original intentionality springs from the Mind of God; we are God's
competing error-correcting regimes, one regime or the other will win out,
and creatures, and derive our intentionality from Him.

hence the isthmus between the competitors will tend to dissolve, leaving
Darwin turned this doctrine upside down: intentionality doesn't come from
empty space between occupied zones of Design Space. Thus, just as norms
of on high; it percolates up from below, from the initially mindless and
pointless pronunciation and word use reinforce clustering in speech
communities (a algorithmic processes that gradually acquire meaning and
intelligence as they theoretically important point made by Quine 1960 in his
discussion of error develop. And, perfectly following the pattern of all
Darwinian thinking, we and the emergence of norms in language ), so
norms of genomic expression see that the first meaning is not full-fledged
meaning; it certainly fails to are the ultimate basis of speci-ation.

manifest all the "essential" properties of real meaning (whatever you may
Through the same molecular-level microscope we see the birth of meaning,
take those properties to be). It is mere quasi-meaning, or semi-semantics. It
is in the acquisition of "semantics'' by the nucleotide sequences, which at
first what John Searle (1980,1985,1992 ) has disparaged as mere "as if are
mere syntactic objects. This is a crucial step in the Darwinian campaign
intentionality" as opposed to what he calls "Original Intentionality." But
you to overthrow John Locke's Mind-first vision of the cosmos.
Philosophers have to start somewhere, and the fact that the first step in the
right direction is commonly agree, for good reason, that meaning and mind
can just barely discernible as a step towards meaning at all is just what we
should expect.

There are two paths to intentionality. The Darwinian path is diachronic, or
historical, and concerns the gradual accretion, over billions of years, of the
9. Note the parallel here with my discussion of the false dichotomy between
Orwellian sorts of Design—of functionality and purposiveness—that can
support an and Stalinesque models of consciousness in Consciousness
Explained (1991a). In that case as well, there is no intrinsic mark of the
canonical.

intentional interpretation of the activities of organisms (the "doings" of

"agents"). Before intentionality can be fully fledged, it must go through its
10. Once again we see the tolerance for topsy-turvy imagery. Some theorists
speak of awkward, ugly period of featherless pseudo-intentionality. The

synchronic basins of attraction, guided by the metaphor of balls rolling
blindly downhill to the local minimum instead of climbing blindly uphill to
the local maximum. Just turn an adaptive landscape inside out and the
mountains become basins, the ridges become canyons, and

"gravity" provides the analogue of selection pressure. It doesn't make any
difference 11. The topic of intentionality has been written about extensively
by philosophers of whether you choose "up" or "down" as the favored
direction, just so long as you are many different traditions in recent years.
For an overview and a general definition, see my consistent. Here I have
slipped, momentarily, into the rival perspective, just to make this article
"Intentionality" (co-authored with John Haugeland) in Gregory 1987. For
more point.

detailed analyses, see my earlier books ( 1969, 1978, 1987b).

206 BIOLOGY IS ENGINEERING

The Computer That Learned to Play Checkers 207

path is the path of Artificial Intelligence, in an organism with genuine in-
Darwinian thinking and Artificial Intelligence. Together they strike a funda-
tentionality—such as yourself—there are, right now, many parts, and some
of mental blow at the last refuge to which people have retreated in the face
of these parts exhibit a sort of semi-intentionality, or mere as if intention-
ality, the Copernican Revolution: the mind as an inner sanctum that science
cannot or pseudo-intentionality—call it what you like—and your own
genuine, fully reach. (See Mazlish 1993) It is a long and winding road from
molecules to fledged intentionality is in fact the product (with no further
miracle minds, with many diverting spectacles along the way—and we will
tarry over ingredients) of the activities of all the semi-minded and mindless
bits that the most interesting of these in subsequent chapters—but now is
the time to make you up (this is the central thesis defended in Dennett
1987b, 1991a).

look more closely than usual at the Darwinian beginnings of Artificial That
is what a mind is—not a miracle-machine, but a huge, semi-designed,
Intelligence.

self-redesigning amalgam of smaller machines, each with its own design
history, each playing its own role in the "economy of the soul." (Plato was
right, as usual, when he saw a deep analogy between a republic and a 5.
THE COMPUTER THAT LEARNED TO PLAY CHECKERS

person—but of course he had much too simple a vision of what this might
mean.)

Alan Turing and John von Neumann were two of the greatest scientists of
the There is a deep affinity between the synchronic and diachronic paths to
century. If anybody could be said to have invented the computer, they did,
intentionality. One way of dramatizing it is to parody an ancient anti-and
their brainchild has come to be recognized as both a triumph of Darwinian
sentiment: the monkey's uncle. Would you want your daughter to
engineering and an intellectual vehicle for exploring the most abstract
realms marry a robot? Well, if Darwin is right, your great-great-...
grandmother was of pure science. Both thinkers were at one and the same
time awesome a robot! A macro, in fact. That is the unavoidable conclusion
of the previous theorists and deeply practical, epitomizing an intellectual
style that has been chapters. Not only are you descended from macros; you
are composed of playing a growing role in science since the Second World
War. In addition to them. Your hemoglobin molecules, your antibodies,
your neurons, your creating the computer, both Turing and von Neumann
made fundamental vestibular-ocular reflex machinery—at every level of
analysis we find contributions to theoretical biology. Von Neumann, as we
have already noted, machinery that dumbly does a wonderful, elegantly
designed job. We have applied his brilliant mind to the abstract problem of
self-replication, and ceased to shudder, perhaps, at the scientific vision of
viruses and bacteria Turing (1952) did pioneering work on the most basic
theoretical problems of busily and mindlessly executing their subversive
projects—horrid little au-embryology or morphogenesis: how can the
complex topology—the shape—

tomata doing their evil deeds. But we should not think that we can take of
an organism arise from the simple topology of the single fertilized cell
comfort in the thought that they are alien invaders, so unlike the more from
which it grows? The process begins, as every high-school student congenial

tissues that make up us. We are made of the same sorts of automata knows,
with an event of quite symmetrical division. (As Francois Jacob has that
invade us—no halos of elan vital distinguish your antibodies from the said,
the dream of every cell is to become two cells.) Two cells become four,
antigens they combat; they simply belong to the club that is you, so they
fight and four become eight, and eight become sixteen; how do hearts and
livers on your behalf.

and legs and brains get started under such a regime?12 Turing saw the Can
it be that if you put enough of these dumb homunculi together you
continuity between such molecular-level problems and the problem of how
a make a real conscious person? The Darwinian says there could be no
other poet writes a sonnet, and from the earliest days of computers, the
ambition of way of making one. Now, it certainly does not follow from the
fact that you those who saw what Turing saw has

are descended from robots that you are a robot. After all, you are also a
direct descendant of some fish, and you are not a fish; you are a direct
descendant of some bacteria, and you are not a bacterium. But unless
dualism or vitalism is true (in which case you have some extra, secret
ingredient in you ), you are 12. Two highly accessible accounts of Turing's
work on morphogenesis are Hodges (

made of robots—or what comes to the same thing, a collection of trillions
of 1983, ch. 7), and Stewart and Golubitsky ( 1992), which also discusses
their relation to macromolecular machines. And all of these are ultimately
descended from the more recent theoretical explorations in the field.
Beautiful as Turing's ideas are, they original macros. So something made of
robots can exhibit genuine probably have at best a very attenuated
application to real biological systems. John consciousness, or genuine
intentionality, because you do if anything does.

Maynard Smith (personal communication) recalls being entranced by
Turing's 1952

paper (which his supervisor, J. B. S. Haldane, had shown him), and for
years he was No wonder, then, that there should be so much antagonism to

both convinced that "my fingers must be Turing waves; my vertebrae must
be Turing waves"—

but he eventually came to realize, reluctantly, that it could not be that
simple and beautiful.

208 BIOLOGY IS ENGINEERING

The Computer That Learned to Play Checkers 209

been to use his wonderful machine to explore the mysteries of thought.13

lectual species, AI, but also of its more recent offshoot, AL, Artificial Life.

Turing published his prophetic essay, "Computing Machinery and Intel-
Legendary though it is, few people today are familiar with its remarkable
ligence," in the philosophical journal Mind in 1950, surely one of the most
details, many of which deserve to be more widely known.14 Samuel's first
frequently cited articles ever to appear in that journal. At the time he wrote
it, checkers program was written in 1952, for the IBM 701, but the learning
there were no Artificial Intelligence programs—there were really only two
version wasn't finished until 1955, and ran on an IBM 704; a later version
ran operating computers in the world—but within a few years, there were
enough on the IBM 7090. Samuel found some elegant ways of coding any
state of a machines up and running twenty-four hours a day so that Arthur
Samuel, a checkers game into four thirty-six-bit "words" and any move into
a simple research scientist at IBM, could fill the otherwise idle late-night
time on one arithmetical operation on those words. (Compared with today's
prodigiously of the early giants with the activities of a program that is as
good a candidate wasteful computer programs which run on for megabytes,
Samuel's basic as any for the retrospective title of AI-Adam. Samuel's
program played program was microscopic in size—a "low-tech" genome
indeed, with fewer checkers, and it got better and better by playing against
itself through the than six thousand lines of code—but, then, he had to write
it in machine small hours of the night, redesigning itself by throwing out
earlier versions code; this was before the days of computer programming
languages.) Once that had not fared well in the nightly tournament and
trying out new he'd solved the problem of representing the basic process of

legal checkers mutations that were mindlessly generated. It eventually
became a much better play, he had to face the truly hard part of the
problem: getting the computer checkers-player than Samuel himself,
providing one of the first clear program to evaluate the moves, so it could
select the best move (or at least counterexamples to the somewhat hysterical
myth that "a computer can really one of the better moves) whenever
possible.

only do what its programmer tells it to do." From our perspective we can
see What would a good evaluation function look like? Some trivial games,
like that this familiar but mistaken idea is nothing but an expression of
Locke's tic-tac-toe, have feasible algorithmic solutions. There is a
guaranteed win or hunch that only Minds can Design, an exploitation of ex
nihilo nihil fit that draw for one player, and this best strategy can be
computed in realistic Darwin had clearly discredited. The way Samuel's
program transcended its amounts of time. Checkers is not such a game.
Samuel (p. 72) pointed out creator, moreover, was by a strikingly classical
process of Darwinian that the space of possible checkers games has on the
order of 1040 choice-evolution.

points, "which, at 3 choices per millimicrosecond, would still take 1021

Samuel's legendary program is thus not only the progenitor of the intel-
centuries to consider." Although today's computers are millions of times
faster than the lumbering giants of Samuel's day, they still couldn't make a
dent on the problem using the brute-force approach of exhaustive search.
The search space is Vast, so the method of search must be "heuristic"—the
13. In fact, the bridge between computers and evolution goes back even
farther, to branching tree of all possible moves has to be ruthlessly pruned
by semi-Charles Babbage, whose 1834 conception of the "Difference
Engine" is generally credited with inaugurating the prehistory of the
computer. Babbage's notorious Ninth Bridgewa-intelligent, myopic demons,
leading to a risky, chance-ridden exploration of a ter Treatise (1838)
exploited his theoretical model of a computing engine to offer a tiny
subportion of the whole space.

mathematical proof that God had in effect programmed nature to generate
the species!

Heuristic search is one of the foundational ideas of Artificial Intelligence.

"On Babbage's smart machine any sequence of numbers could be
programmed to cut in, One might even define the task of the field of AI as
the creation and inves-however long another series had been running. By
analogy, God at Creation had appointed new sets of animals and plants to
appear like clockwork throughout history—he had created the laws which
produced them, rather than creating them direct" ( Desmond and Moore
1991, p. 213). Darwin knew Babbage and his Treatise, and even attended
his parties in London. Desmond and Moore (pp. 212-18) offer some
tantalizing glimpses 14. Samuel's 1959 paper was reprinted in the first
anthology of Artificial Intelligence, into the traffic of ideas that may have
crossed this bridge.

Feigenbaum and Feldman's classic, Computers and Thought ( 1964 ).
Although I had read More than a century later, another London society of
like-minded thinkers, the Ratio that paper in Feigenbaum and Feldman
when it first came out, I had, like most readers, Club, served as the hotbed
for more recent ideas. Jonathan Miller drew my attention to passed over
most of the details and savored the punch line: a 1962 match between the
the Ratio Club, and urged me to research its history in the course of writing
this book,

"adult" program and Robert Nealey, a checkers champion. Nealey was
gracious in defeat: but I have not made much progress to date. I am
tantalized, however, by the 1951

"In the matter of the end game, I have not had such competition from any
human being photograph of its membership that graces the front of A. M.
Uttley's Information Trans-since 1954, when I lost my last game." It took a
superb lecture by my colleague George mission in the Nervous System
(1979 ): Alan Turing is seated on the lawn, along with the Smith in an
introductory course in computer science that we cotaught at Tufts to rekin-
neurobiologist Horace Barlow (a direct descendant of Darwin, by the way);
standing dle my interest in the details of Samuel's article, in which I find
something new and behind are Ross Ashby, Donald MacKay, and other
major figures of the earliest days of valuable every time I reread it.

what has become cognitive science. It's a small world.

210 B

The Computer That Learned to Play Checkers 211

IOLOGY IS ENGINEERING

tigation of heuristic algorithms. But there is also a tradition within computer
1 for each string of passive pieces that occupy three adjacent diagonal
science and mathematics of contrasting heuristic methods with algorithmic
squares." At any one time, sixteen of the terms were thrown together into
the methods: heuristic methods are risky, not guaranteed to yield results,
whereas working genome of the active polynomial and the rest were idle.
By a lot of algorithms come with a guarantee. How do we resolve this
"contradiction"?

inspired guesswork and even more inspired tuning and tinkering, Samuel
There is no contradiction at all. Heuristic algorithms are, like all algorithms,
devised rules for elimination from the tournament, and found ways of
mechanical procedures that are guaranteed to do what they do, but what
they keeping the brew stirred up, so that the trial-and-error process was
likely to do is engage in risky search! They are not guaranteed to find
anything—or at hit upon good combinations of terms and coefficients and
recognize them least they are not guaranteed to find the specific thing
sought in the amount of when it did. The program was divided into Alpha, a
rapidly mutating pioneer, time available. But, like well-run tournaments of
skill, good heuristic and Beta, a conservative opponent that played the
version that had won the algorithms tend to yield highly interesting, reliable
results in reasonable most recent game. "Alpha generalizes on its
experience after each move by amounts of time. They are risky, but the
good ones are good risks indeed.

adjusting the coefficients in its evaluation polynomial and by replacing
terms You can bet your life on them (Dennett 1989b). Failure to appreciate
the fact which appear to be unimportant by new parameters drawn from the
reserve that algorithms can be heuristic procedures has misled more than a
few critics list" (Samuel 1964, p. 83).

of Artificial Intelligence, In particular, it has misled Roger Penrose, whose
At the start an arbitrary selection of 16 terms was chosen and all terms
views will be the topic of chapter 15.

were assigned equal weights__ During [the early rounds] a total of 29

Samuel saw that the Vast space of checkers could only be feasibly ex-
different terms was discarded and replaced, the majority of these on two
plored by a process that riskily pruned the search tree, but how do you go
different occasions __ The quality of the play was extremely poor. During
about constructing the pruning and choosing demons to do this job? What
the next seven games there were at least eight changes made in the top
readily programmable stop-looking-now rules or evaluation functions
would listing involving five different terms __ Quality of play improved
steadily have a better-than-chance power to grow a search tree in wise
directions?

but the machine still played rather badly ___ Some fairly good amateur
Samuel was searching for a good algorithmic searching method. He pro-
players who played the machine during this period [after seven more ceeded
empirically, beginning by devising ways of mechanizing whatever games]
agreed that it was 'tricky but beatable'. [Samuel 1964, p. 89]

obvious rules of thumb he could think of. Look before you leap, of course,
and learn from your mistakes, so the system should have a memory in
which Samuel noted (p. 89) that, although the learning at this early stage
was to store past experience. "Rote learning" carried the prototype quite far,
by surprisingly fast, it was "quite erratic and none too stable." He was
discov-simply storing thousands of positions it had already encountered and
seen the ering that the problem space being explored was a rugged fitness
landscape in fruits of. But rote learning can only take you so far; Samuel's
program which a program using simple hill-climbing techniques tended to
fall into confronted rapidly diminishing returns when it had stored in the
neighbor-traps, instabilities, and obsessive loops from which the program
could not hood of a million words of description of past experience and
began to be recover without a helping nudge or two from its designer. He
was able to overcome with indexing and retrieval problems. When higher or
more recognize the "defects" in his system responsible for these instabilities

and versatile performance is required, a different strategy of design has to
kick in: patch them. The final system—the one that beat Nealey—was a
Rube Gold-generalization.

berg amalgam of rote learning, kludges,15 and products of self-design that
Instead of trying to find the search procedure himself, Samuel tried to get
were quite inscrutable to Samuel himself.

the computer to find it. He wanted the computer to design its own
evaluation function, a mathematical formula—a polynomial—that would
yield a number, positive or negative, for every move it considered, such
that, in 15. Pronounced to rhyme with "stooge," a kludge is an ad hoc or
jury-rigged patch or general, the higher the number, the better the move.
The polynomial was to software repair. Purists spell this slang word
"kluge," drawing attention to its (likely) be concocted of lots of pieces, each
contributing positively or negatively, etymology in the deliberate
mispronunciation of the German word klug(e), meaning multiplied by one
coefficient or another, and adjusted to various other

"clever"; but according to The New Hacker's Dictionary (Raymond 1993),
the term may circumstances, but Samuel had no idea what sort of
concoction would work have an earlier ancestor, deriving from the Kluge
paper feeder, an "adjunct to mechanical well. He made some thirty-eight
different chunks—"terms"—and threw them printing presses" in use as
early as 1935. In its earlier use, it named "a complex and puzzling artifact
with a trivial function." The mixture of esteem and contempt hackers into a
"pool." Some of the terms were intuitively valuable, such as those exhibit
for kluges ("How couid anything so dumb be so smart!") perfectly
reproduces giving points for increased mobility or potential captures, but
others were the attitude of biologists when they marvel at the perversely
intricate solutions Mother more or less off the wall—such as "DYKE: the
parameter is credited with Nature so often discovers.

212 BIOLOGY IS ENGINEERING

Artifact Hermeneutics, or Reverse Engineering 213

It is not surprising that Samuel's program caused a tremendous sensation, a
function, sometimes they overlook retrospectively obvious shortcuts. Still,
and greatly encouraged the early visionaries of AI, but the enthusiasm for
optimality must be the default assumption; if the reverse engineers can't
such learning algorithms soon faded. The more people looked into the
assume that there is a good rationale for the features they observe, they can't
attempt to extend his methods to more complex problems—chess, for even
begin their analysis.16

instance, to say nothing of real-world, non-toy problems—the more the
Darwin's revolution does not discard the idea of reverse engineering but,
success of Samuel's Darwinian learner seemed to be attributable to the
rather, permits it to be reformulated. Instead of trying to figure out what
God relative simplicity of checkers rather than to the power of the
underlying intended, we try to figure out what reason, if any, "Mother
Nature"— the learning capacity. Was this, then, the end of Darwinian AI?
Of course not. It process of evolution by natural selection itself
—"discerned" or "dis-just had to hibernate for a while until computers and
computer scientists criminated" for doing things one way rather than
another. Some biologists could advance a few more levels of complexity.

and philosophers are very uncomfortable with any such talk about Mother
Today, the offspring of Samuel's program are multiplying so fast that at
Nature's reasons. They think it is a step backwards, an unmotivated conces-
least three new journals have been founded in the last year or two to
provide a sion to pre-Darwinian habits of thought, at best a treacherous
metaphor. So forum: Evolutionary Computation, Artificial Life, and
Adaptive Behavior. The they are inclined to agree with the recent critic of
Darwinism, Tom Bethell, in first of these emphasizes traditional
engineering concerns: using simulated thinking there is something fishy
about this double standard (see page 73 ). I evolution as a method to expand
the practical design powers of programmers claim that it is not just well
motivated; it is extremely fruitful and, in fact, or software engineers. The
"genetic algorithms" devised by John Holland unavoidable. As we have
already seen, even at the molecular level you just (who worked with Art
Samuel at IBM on his checkers program) have can't do biology without
doing reverse engineering, and you can't do reverse demonstrated their

power in the no-nonsense world of software development engineering
without asking what reasons there are for whatever it is you are and have
mutated into a phylum of algorithmic variations. The other two studying.
You have to ask "why" questions. Darwin didn't show us that we journals
concentrate on more biologically flavored research, in which the don't have
to ask them; he showed us how to answer them (Kitcher 1985a).

simulations of evolutionary processes permit us, really for the first time, to
Since the next chapter will be devoted to defending this claim by dem-study
the biological design process itself by manipulating it—or, rather, by
onstrating the ways in which the process of evolution by natural selection is
manipulating a large-scale simulation of it. As Holland has said, Artificial
Life like a clever engineer, it is important that we first establish two
important programs do permit us to "rewind the tape of life" and replay it,
again and ways in which it is not like a clever engineer.

again, in many variations.

When we human beings design a new machine, we usually start with a 6.
ARTIFACT HERMENEUTICS, OR REVERSE ENGINEERING

16. This fact has been exploited by counter-reverse-engineers. I discuss an
example in The strategy of interpreting organisms as if they were artifacts
has a lot in Dennett 1978 (p. 279):

common with the strategy known to engineers as reverse engineering (
Den-There is a book on how to detect fake antiques (which is also,
inevitably, a book on nett 1990b). When Raytheon wants to make an
electronic widget to compete how to make fake antiques ) which offers this
sly advice to those who want to fool the with General Electrics widget, they
buy several of GE's widgets and proceed

"expert" buyer: once you have completed your table or whatever (having
utilized all the usual means of simulating age and wear) take a modern
electric drill and drill a to analyze them: that's reverse engineering. They
run them, benchmark them, hole right through the piece in some
conspicuous but puzzling place. The would-be X-ray them, take them apart,
and subject every part of them to interpretive buyer will argue: no one

would drill such a disfiguring hole without a reason (it can't analysis: Why
did GE make these wires so heavy? What are these extra ROM

be supposed to look "authentic" in any way ) so it must have served a
purpose, which registers for? Is this a double layer of insulation, and, if so,
why did they means this table must have been in use in someone's home;
since it was in use in bother with it? Notice that the reigning assumption is
that all these "why"

someone's home, it was not made expressly for sale in this antique shop
___Therefore it is authentic. Even if this "conclusion" left room for
lingering doubts, the buyer will questions have answers. Everything has a
raison d'etre; GE did nothing in be so preoccupied dreaming up uses for
that hole it will be months before the doubts vain.

can surface.

Of course, if the wisdom of the reverse engineers includes a healthy It has
been claimed, with what plausibility I do not know, that Bobby Fischer has
used the helping of self-knowledge, they will recognize that this default
assumption of same strategy to defeat opponents in chess, especially when
time is running out: make a optimality is too strong: sometimes engineers
put stupid, pointless things in deliberately "off-the-wall" move and watch
your opponent waste precious time trying to their designs, sometimes they
forget to remove things that no longer have make sense of it.

214 BIOLOGY IS ENGINEERING

Artifact Hermeneutics, or Reverse Engineering

pretty-good version of the machine on hand, either an earlier model, or a
1969, p. 126). This is the very engine of Darwinian evolution. If, however,

"mockup" or scale model that we have built. We examine it carefully, and
try we look back with tunnel vision at your family tree, we will find many
out various alterations: "If we just bend this jaw up a little bit like so, and

different organisms, with a wide variety of strengths and weaknesses, but,
move this zipper-bit over a tad like so, it would work even better." But that
is curiously enough, their weaknesses never led a single one of them to a
not the way evolution works. This comes out especially clearly at the
premature demise! So it looks from this angle as if evolution can't explain
molecular level. A particular molecule is the shape it is, and won't tolerate
even a single feature that you inherited from your ancestors! Suppose we
much bending or reshaping. What evolution has to do when it improves
look back at the fan-out of your ancestors. Notice first that eventually it
stops molecular design is to make another molecule—one that is almost
like the fanning out and begins to double up; you share multiple ancestors
with one that doesn't work very well—and simply discard the old one.

everybody else alive today, and are multiply related to many of your own
People are advised never to switch horses in midstream, but evolution
ancestors. When we look at the whole tree over time, we see that the later,
always switches horses. It can't fix anything, except by selecting and dis-
more recent ancestors have improvements that the earlier ones lacked, but
all carding. So in every evolutionary process—and hence in every true
evolu-the crucial events—all the selection events—happen offstage: not a
single tionary explanation—there is always a faint but disconcerting odor of
one of your ancestors, all the way back to the bacteria, succumbed to
something dicey. I will call this phenomenon bait-and-switch, after the
shady predation before reproducing, or lost out to the competition for a
mate.

practice of attracting customers by advertising something at a bargain price
Of course, evolution does explain all the features that you inherited from
and then, when you've lured them to the store, trying to sell them a
substitute.

your ancestors, but not by explaining why you are lucky enough to have
Unlike that practice, evolutionary bait-and-switch is not really nefarious; it
them. It explains why today's winners have the features they do, but not
why just seems to be, because it doesn't explain what at first you thought
you these individuals have the features they do.17 Consider: You order a
new car, wanted explained. It subtly changes the topic.

and specify that it be green. On the appointed day, you go to the dealership
We saw the ominous shadow of bait-and-switch in its purest form in and
there it sits, green and new. Which is the right question to ask: "Why is
chapter 2, in the weird wager that I can produce somebody who wins ten
this car green?" or "Why is this (green) car here?" (In later chapters we will
consecutive coin-tosses without a loss. I don't know in advance who that
look further at the implications of bait-and-switch.) somebody is going to
be; I just know that the mantle will pass—has to pass, The second important
difference between the processes—and hence the as a matter of algorithmic
necessity—to somebody or other so long as I products—of natural selection
and human engineering concerns the feature of execute the algorithm. If
you overlook this possibility and take my sucker bet, natural selection that
strikes many people as most paradoxical: its utter lack it is because you are
too used to the human practice of tracking individuals of foresight. When
human engineers design something (forward engineering), and building
projects around identified individuals and their future prospects.

they must guard against a notorious problem: unforeseen side effects. When
And if the winner of the tournament thinks there has to be an explanation of
two or more systems, well designed in isolation, are put into a supersystem,
why he won, he is mistaken: there is no reason at all why he won; there is
this often produces interactions that were not only not part of the intended
only a very good reason why somebody won. But, being human, the winner
design, but positively harmful; the activity of one system inadvertently will
no doubt think there ought to be a reason why he won: "If your clobbers the
activity of the other. The only practical way to guard against

'evolutionary account' can't explain it, then you are leaving out something
unforeseen side effects, since by their very nature they are unforeseeable by
important!" To which the evolutionist must calmly reply: "Sir, I know that
is those whose gaze is perforce restricted to just one of the subsystems
being what you came in here wanting, but let me try to interest you in
something a designed, is to design all subsystems to have relatively
impenetrable little more affordable, a little less presumptuous, a little more
defensible."

boundaries that coincide with the epistemic boundaries of their creators.

Has it ever occurred to you how lucky you are to be alive? More than 99

Human engineers typically attempt to insulate subsystems from each other,
percent of all the creatures that have ever lived have died without progeny,
and insist on an overall design in which each subsystem has a single, well-
but not a single one of your ancestors falls into that group! What a royal
defined function within the whole.

lineage of winners you come from! (Of course, the same thing is true of
every The set of supersystems having this fundamental abstract architecture
is barnacle, every blade of grass, every housefly.) But it's even eerier than
that.

We have learned, have we not, that evolution works by weeding out the
unfit?

Thanks to their design defects, these losers have a "pathetic but
praiseworthy 17. "But this is not to explain why, e.g., contractile vacuoles
occur in certain protozoans; tendency to die before reproducing their kind"
(Quine it is to explain why the sort of protozoan incorporating contractile
vacuoles occurs"

(Cummins 1975, in Sober 1984b, pp. 394-95).

216 BIOLOGY IS ENGINEERING

Artifact Hermeneutics, or Reverse Engineering 217

vast and interesting, of course, but it does not include very many of the
process by which a genotype gets "expressed" in a fully formed phenotype.

systems designed by natural selection! The process of evolution is notori-
And the design processes that shaped the developmental processes that
shape ously lacking in foresight. Since it has no foresight at all, unforeseen
or the "finished products" were largely inaccessible to the sorts of intrusive
unforeseeable side effects are nothing to it; it proceeds, unlike human en-
observation and manipulation that good science (or good reverse gineers,
via the profligate process of creating vast numbers of relatively

engineering) thrives on. You could look at the sketchy historical record, and
uninsulated designs, most of which are hopelessly flawed because of self-
run it in fast-forward (like "elapsed-time" photography of plants growing,
defeating side effects, but a few of which, by dumb luck, are spared that
weather developing, etc.—always a nifty way to make the patterns visible ),
ignominious fate. Moreover, this apparently inefficient design philosophy
but you couldn't "rewind the tape" and run variations on the initial
conditions.

carries a tremendous bonus that is relatively unavailable to the more
efficient, Now, thanks to computer simulations, it is possible to study the
hypotheses top-down process of human engineers: thanks to its having no
bias against about the design process that have always lain at the heart of
the Darwinian unexamined side effects, it can take advantage of the rare
cases where vision. Not surprisingly, they turn out to be more complicated,
and beneficial serendipitous side effects emerge. Sometimes, that is, designs
themselves more intricately designed, than we had thought.

emerge in which systems interact to produce more than was aimed at. In
Once the processes of R and D and construction begin to come into focus,
particular (but not exclusively), one gets elements in such systems that have
we can see that an affliction of shortsightedness that has often misled
multiple functions.

interpreters of human artifacts has multiple parallels in biology. When we
Elements with multiple functions are not unknown to human engineering,
engage in artifact hermeneutics, trying to decipher the design of items of
course, but their relative rarity is signaled by the delight we are apt to feel
uncovered by archeologists, or trying to recover a proper interpretation of
the when we encounter a new one. (A favorite of mine is found in the
Diconix ancient monuments that we have grown up with, there is a
tendency to portable printer. This optimally tiny printer runs on largish
rechargeable overlook the possibility that some of the features that puzzle
us have no batteries, which have to be stored somewhere; they fit snugly
inside the function at all in the finished product, but played a crucial
functional role in platen, or roller.) On reflection, we can see that such
instances of multiple the process that created the product.

function are epistemically accessible to engineers under various salubrious
Cathedrals, for instance, have many curious architectural features that have
circumstances, but we can also see that by and large such solutions to
design provoked functional fantasies and fierce debates among art
historians. The problems must be exceptions against a background of strict
isolation of functions of some of these features are fairly obvious. The
many "vises" or functional elements. In biology, we encounter quite crisp
anatomical isolation circular stairways that twist their way up inside the
piers and walls are useful of functions (the kidney is entirely distinct from
the heart; nerves and blood ways for custodians to gain access to remote
parts of the building: to the roof, vessels are separate conduits strung
through the body, etc.), and without this say, and to the space between the
vault and the roof where the machinery is readily discernible isolation,
reverse engineering in biology would no doubt hidden that lowers the
chandeliers to the floor so that candles may be be humanly impossible. But
we also see superim-position of functions that replaced. But many of the
vises would be there even if no such later access apparently goes "all the
way down." It is very, very hard to think about had been anticipated by the
builders; it was simply the best, or maybe the entities in which the elements
have multiple overlapping roles in only, way for the builders to get the
building crew and materials where they superimposed subsystems, and,
moreover, in which some of the most salient needed to be during
construction. Other passageways leading nowhere inside effects observable
in the interaction of these elements may not be functions at the walls are
probably there in order to get fresh air into the interior of the all. but merely
by-products of the multiple functions being served.18

walls (Fitchen 1961). Medieval mortar took a long time— years, in some
Until recently, biologists who wanted to be reverse engineers had to cases—
to cure, and as it cured it shrank, so care was taken to keep wall concentrate
on figuring out the designed features of "finished products"—

thickness minimized so that distortion was minimized as the building cured.

organisms. These they could collect by the hundreds or thousands, study the
(Thus those passageways have a similar function to the heat-dissipation
"fins"

variations thereof, take apart, and manipulate ad lib. It was much more on
automobile-engine housings, except that their functions lapsed once the
difficult to get any epistemic purchase on the developmental or building
buildings reached maturity.)

Moreover, much that appears unremarkable when you look at a cathedral as
simply a finished product seems deeply puzzling when you start asking 18.
The preceding three paragraphs are drawn, with revisions, from Dennett
1994a.

how it could have been built. Chicken-egg problems abound. If you build
the flying buttresses before you build the central vault, they will push the
218 BIOLOGY IS ENGINEERING

walls in; if you build the vault first, it will spread the walls before the
buttresses can be installed; if you try to build them both at once, it seems
likely that the staging for one would get in the way of the staging for the
other. It is surely a problem that has a solution—probably many different
ones—but thinking them up and then looking for the evidence to confirm or
disconfirm them is a challenging exercise. One strategy that recurs is one
we have already seen in action in Cairns-Smith's clay-crystal hypothesis:
there must have been scaffolding members that have disappeared, that
functioned only during the building process. Such structures often leave
clues of their former presence. Plugged "putlog holes" are the most obvious.
Heavy timbers called "putlogs" were temporarily fixed in the walls to bear
the scaffolding above them.

Many of the decorative elements of Gothic architecture, such as the
elaborate patterns of ribs in the vaults, are really structurally functional
members—but only during the construction phase. They had to be erected
before the "web courses" of the vaults could be filled in between them.
They stiffened the relatively delicate wooden "centering" scaffolding, which
would otherwise have tended to buckle and deform under the temporarily
uneven weight of partially built vaults. There were severe limits on the
strength of scaffolding that could be constructed and held securely in place
at great heights using medieval materials and methods. These limits dictated
many of the "ornamental" details of the finished church. Another way of
making the same point: many readily conceivable finished products were

simply impossible to erect, given the constraints on the building process,
and many of the apparently non-functional features of existing buildings are
in fact enabling design features without which the finished product could
not exist.

The invention of cranes (real cranes) and their kin opened up regions of the
space of architectural possibility that were previously inaccessible.19

The point is simple, but casts a long shadow: When you ask functional
questions about anything—organism or artifact—you must remember that it
has to come into its current or final form by a process that has its own
requirements, and these are exactly as amenable to functional analysis as
any features of the end state. No bell rings to mark the end of building and
the beginning of functioning (cf. Fodor 1987, p. 103). The requirement that
an organism be a going concern at every stage of its life places iron
constraints on its later features.

19. Foui classic explorations of these issues are John Fitchen's The
Construction of Gothic Cathedrals, which reads like a detective story,
Fitchen's Building Construction Before Mechanization ( 1986), William
Barclay Parsons' Engineers and Engineering in the Renaissance ( 1939,
republished by MIT Press, 1967) and Bertrand Gille's Engineers FIGURE
8.1. Early rotating cranes and other

of the Renaissance ( 1966 ).

devices for raising or moving loads. (From Diderot and d'Alembert,
Encyclopedic

[1751-1772], reproduced in Fitchen 1986.)

220 BIOLOGY IS ENGINEERING

Stuart Kauffman as Meta-Engineer 221

D'Arcy Thompson (1917) famously said that everything is what it is brand-
new science: chaos theory and complexity theory, strange attractors because
it got that way, and his own reflections on the historical processes of and

fractals. He himself has been tempted by that view in the past (Lewin
development led to his promulgation of "laws of form" that are often cited
as 1992, pp. 40-43), but his book bristles with warnings, fending off the
examples of biological laws that are irreducible to physical laws. The
embrace of the anti-Darwinians. He begins the preface of his book (p. vii)
by importance of such reconstructions of developmental processes and the
describing it as "an attempt to include Darwinism in a broader context":
investigation of their implications is undeniable, but this issue is sometimes
misplaced in discussions that attempt to contrast such developmental Yet
our task is not only to explore the sources of order which may lie
constraints with functional analyses. No sound functional analysis is com-
available to evolution. We must also integrate such knowledge with the
plete until it has confirmed ( as much as these points ever can be confirmed
) basic insight offered by Darwin. Natural selection, whatever our doubt in
that a building path has been specified. If some biologists have habitually
detailed cases, is surely a preeminent force in evolution. Therefore, to
overlooked this requirement, they are making the same mistake as the art
combine the themes of self-organization and selection, we must expand
historians who ignore the building process of their monuments. Far from
evolutionary theory so that it stands on a broader foundation and then being
too taken with an engineering mentality, they have not taken engi-raise a
new edifice. [Kauffman 1993, p. xiv.]

neering questions seriously enough.

I go to such lengths to quote Kauffman himself on this point since I have
also felt the strong wind of anti-Darwinian sentiment among my own
readers 7. STUART KAUFFMAN AS META-ENGINEER

and critics, and know that they will be strongly motivated to suspect that I
am merely reworking Kauffman's ideas to fit my own biased view! No, he
Since Darwin, we have come to think of organisms as tinkered-together
himself—for whatever that is worth—now sees his work as a deepening of
contraptions and selection as the sole source of order. Yet Darwin could
Darwinism, not an overthrow. But, then, what can be his point about "spon-
not have begun to suspect the power of self-organization. We must seek

taneous self-organization" as a source of "order" if not a flat denial that our
principles of adaptation in complex systems anew.

selection is the ultimate source of order?

Now that it is possible to build truly complex evolutionary scenarios on

—STUART KAUFFMAN, quoted in Ruthen 1993, p.

computers, rewinding the tape over and over, we can see patterns that
eluded earlier Darwinian theorists. What we see, Kauffman claims, is that
order History tends to repeat itself. Today we all recognize that the
rediscovery

"shines through" in spite of selection, not because of it. Instead of
witnessing of Mendel's laws, and with them the concept of the gene as a
unit of heredity, the gradual accrual of organization under the steady
pressure of cumulative was the salvation of Darwinian thinking, but that
was not how it appeared at selection, we witness the inability of selective
pressure (which can be the time. As Maynard Smith notes (1982, p. 3),
"The first impact of carefully manipulated and monitored in the
simulations) to overcome an Mendelism on evolutionary biology was
distinctly odd. The early Men-inherent tendency of the populations in
question to resolve themselves into delians saw themselves as anti-
Darwinians." This was just one of many self-ordered patterns. So this seems
at first to be a striking demonstration that styled anti-Darwinian revolutions
that have turned out to be pro-Darwinian natural selection cannot be the
source of organization and order after all—

reformations, dragging Darwin's dangerous idea from one sickbed or
another which would indeed be the downfall of the Darwinian idea.

and putting it back to work. Another that is unfolding before our eyes today
is But there is another way of looking at it, as we have seen. What
conditions the new direction in evolutionary thinking spearheaded by Stuart

Kauffman have to be in effect for evolution by natural selection to occur?
The words 1

and his colleagues at the Santa Fe Institute. Like every good bandwagon, it
has put into Darwin's mouth were simple: Give me Order, and time, and I
will a slogan: "Evolution on the Edge of Chaos." Kauffman's new book, The
give you Design. But what we have subsequently learned is that not every
Origins of Order: Self-Organization and Selection in Evolution (1993),
variety of Order is sufficient for evolvability. As we saw illustrated by Con-
summarizes and extends the research he has been engaged in for several
way's Game of Life, you have to have just the right sort of Order, with just
decades, and lets us see for the first time how he himself places his ideas in
the right mix of freedom and constraint, growth and decay, rigidity and the
context of the history of the field.

fluidity, for good things to happen at all. You only get evolution, as the
Santa Many have heralded him as a Darwin-slayer, finally driving that
oppressive Fe motto proclaims, on the edge of chaos, in the regions of
possible law that presence from the scene, and doing it, moreover, with the
flashing blade of 222 BIOLOGY IS ENGINEERING

Stuart Kauffman as MetaEngineer 223

form the hybrid zone between stifling order and destructive chaos. Fortu-
such landscapes, smooth or rugged, governs both the evolvability of pop-
nately, our portion of the universe is poised in just such a zone, in which the
ulations and the sustained fitness of their members. The structure of fitness
conditions for evolvability are tuned just right. And where did those salu-
landscapes inevitably imposes limitations on adaptive search. [Kauffman
brious conditions come from? They could "in principle" have come from
the 1993, p. 118.]

wisdom and foresight of a designer like Conway, or they could have come
Notice that this is all pure Darwinism—every bit acceptable and nonrev-
from a prior evolutionary process, either one with selection or one without.

olutionary, but with a major shift of emphasis to the role of the topology of
In fact—and this, I think, is the heart of Kauffrnan's vision—evolvability

the fitness landscape, which, Kauffman argues, has a profound effect on the
itself not only must evolve (for us to be here), but is likely to evolve, is
almost rate at which design innovations can be found, and the order in
which design sure to evolve, because it is a forced move in the game of
Design.20 Either you chances can accumulate. If you have ever tried to
write a sonnet, you have find the path that leads to evolvability or you don't
go anywhere, but finding confronted the basic design problem that
Kauffrnan's models examine: the path to evolvability is not such a big deal;
it's "obvious." The principles of

"epistasis," or the interactions between genes. As the budding poet soon
design that make biological evolution possible will be found, again and
again discovers, writing a sonnet isn't easy! Saying something meaningful
—let and again, no matter how many times we rerun the tape. "Contrary to
all our alone beautiful—within the rigid constraints of the sonnet form is a
frus-expectations, the answer, I think, is that it may be surprisingly easy"

trating exercise. No sooner do you tentatively fix one line than you have to
(Kauffman 1993, p. xvi).

revise many of the other lines, and that forces you to abandon some hard-
won When we considered forced moves in Design Space in chapter 6, we
were excellences, and so forth, round and round in circles, searching for an
overall thinking about features of the final products that were so obviously
"right"

good fit—or, we might say, searching for overall good fitness. The that we
would not be surprised to find them independently appearing—

mathematician Stanislaw Ulam saw that the constraints of poetry could be a
arithmetic among the alien intelligences, eyes wherever there is locomotion
source of creativity, not a hindrance. The idea may apply to the creativity of
through a transparent medium. But what about features of the process of
evolution, for just the same reason:

creating those products? If there are fundamental rules about how things
have to be designed, about the order in which design innovations can be
created, When I was a boy I felt that the role of rhyme in poetry was to

compel one the strategies of design that are bound to work or fail, then
these should be to find the unobvious because of the necessity of finding a
word which homed in on by evolution just as surely as the features of the
finished rhymes. This forces novel associations and almost guarantees
deviations products. What Kauffman has discovered, I submit, is not so
much laws of from routine chains or trains of thought. It becomes
paradoxically a sort of form as rules for designing: the imperatives of meta-
engineering. Kauffman automatic mechanism of originality. [Ulam 1976, p.
180.) has many telling observations to make about just such principles of
meta-engineering that govern the process by which new designs could, in
practice, Before Kauffman, biologists tended to ignore the prospect that
evolution be created. We can consider them to be features of the whole
phenomenon of would confront the same sort of pervasive interactions,
because they had no evolution that have already been discovered, have
already gone to fixation, clear way of studying it. His work shows that
making a viable genome is in effect, in our part of the universe. (We will
not be surprised to find them more like writing a good poem than simply
jotting down a shopping list.

everywhere else in the universe where there are designed things, because
this Since the structure of fitness landscapes is more important than we had
is the only way to design things.)

thought (with our simpler, Mount Fuji models of hill-climbing), there are
constraints on design-improvement methods that keep engineering projects
Adaptive evolution is a search process—driven by mutation, recombina-
channeled into more narrow paths to success than we had imagined.

tion, and selection—on fixed or deforming fitness landscapes. An adapting
population flows over the landscape under these forces. The structure of
Evolvability, the capacity to search a reasonable fraction of the space, may
be optimized when landscape structure, mutation rate, and population size
are adjusted so that populations just begin to 'melt' from local regions of the
space. [Kauffman 1993, p. 95.]

20. The evolution of evolvability is a (retrospectively!) obvious recursive
move for Darwinians to promulgate—a likely source of cranes, you might
say—and it has been One ubiquitous feature in biological evolution that

Kauffman concentrates discussed by many thinkers. For an early
discussion, see Wimsatt 1981. For a different slant on the issue, see
Dawkins 1989b.

on is the principle that "local rules generate global order." This is not 224
BIOLOGY IS ENGINEERING

Stuart Kauffman as MetaEngineer 225

a principle that governs human engineering. Pyramids are always built from
signed a special developmental mechanism to protect against such experi-
the bottom up, of course, but the organization of the building process, since
mentation. (This would be analogous to IBM's forbidding its computer the
days of the pharaohs, has been top-down, under the control of a single
scientists to investigate alternative architectures for its CPU or central-
autocrat who had a clear and literally commanding vision of the whole, but
processing-unit chip— designed resistance to change.) probably was a bit
vague about how the local details would be accomplished.

And what is Kauffman's contrasting explanation? It starts with the same

"Global" direction from on high puts in motion a hierarchical cascade of
point and takes it in a rather different direction:

"local" projects. This is such a common feature of large-scale human
projects that we have a hard time imagining alternatives (Papert 1993,
Dennett

... a locking-in of early development, and hence von Baer's laws, do not
1993a). Since we don't recognize the principle Kauffman discerns as one
that represent a special mechanism of developmental canalization, the usual
is familiar from human engineering, we are not apt to see it as a principle of
sense of which is a buffering of the phenotype against genetic alteration ___

engineering at all, but I suggest that it is. Reformulated slightly, we could
put Instead, locking-in of early development is a direct reflection of the fact
it as follows. Until you manage to evolve communicating organisms that
can that the number of ways to improve organisms by altering early

ontogeny form large engineering organizations, you are bound by the
following has dwindled faster than the number of ways to improve by
altering late Preliminary Design Principle: all global order must be
generated by local development. [Kauffman 1993, p. 77. See also Wimsatt
1986.]

rules. So all the early products of design, up to the creation of something
with some of the organizational talents of Homo sapiens, must obey
whatever Think of the issue from the point of view of human engineering
for a constraints follow from the "management decision" that all order must
be moment. Why is it that the foundations of churches are more alike than
their accomplished by local rules. Any "attempts" to create living forms that
upper stories? Well, says the traditional Darwinian, they have to be built
first, violate this precept will end in immediate failure—or, more accurately,
will and any wise contractor will tell you that if you must tinker with design
not even get started sufficiently to be discernible as attempts.

elements, work on the steeple ornament first, or the windows. You are less
If no bell rings, as I have said, to mark the moment when the R-and-D

apt to have a disastrous crash than if you try to come up with a new way of
process ends and the life of the "finished product" begins, it should at least
preparing the foundation. So it is not so surprising that churches all start out
sometimes be hard to tell whether a design principle in question is a
principle looking more or less alike, with the big differences emerging in
the later of engineering or of meta-engineering. A case in point is
Kauffman's (1993, elaborations of the building process. Actually, says
Kauffman, there really pp. 75ff.) proposed rederivation of "von Baer's laws"
of embryology. One of just aren't as many different possible solutions to the
foundation problem as there are to later building problems. Even stupid
contractors who butted their the most striking patterns in the embryos of
animals is the fact that they all heads against this fact for eons would not
come up with a wide variety of start out so much the same.

foundation designs. This difference of emphasis may look small, but it has
some important implications. Kauffman says we don't need to look for a
Thus early fish, frog, chick and human embryos are remarkably similar __

canalization mechanism to explain this fact; it will take care of itself. But
The familiar explanation for these laws is that mutants [I think he means
there is also an underlying agreement between Kauffman and the tradition
he

"mutations"] affecting early ontogeny are more disruptive than mutants
wants to supplant: there are only so many good ways of building things,
affecting late ontogeny. Thus mutants altering early development are less
given the starting constraints, and evolution finds them again and again.

likely to accumulate, and early embryos remain more similar from one
order of organisms to another than do late embryos. Is this plausible ar-It is
the non-optionality of these "choices" that Kauffman wants to stress,
gument actually so plausible? [Kauffman 1993, p. 75]

and so he and his colleague Brian Goodwin (e.g., 1986) are particularly
eager to discredit the powerful image, first made popular by the great
French biologists Jacques Monod and Francois Jacob, of Mother Nature as
a The traditional Darwinian, on Kauffman's reading, places the
responsibility

"tinker," engaging in the sort of tinkering the French call bricolage. The
term for von Baer's laws in a "special mechanism," built right into
organisms.

was first made salient by the anthropologist Claude Levi-Strauss (1966). A
Why don't we see many finished products with strikingly different early
tinker or bricoleur is an opportunistic maker of gadgets, a "sat-isficer"

embryos? Well, since change-orders that affect early parts of the process
tend (Simon 1957) who is always ready to settle for mediocrity if it is cheap
to be more disastrous in their effect on the finished product than change-
enough. A tinker is not a deep thinker. The two elements of classical orders
that affect later parts of die process, Mother Nature has de-226 BIOLOGY
IS ENGINEERING

Stuart Kauffman as MetaEngineer 227

Darwinism that Monod and Jacob concentrate on are chance on the one
hand We have come to think of selection as essentially the only source of
order and, on the other, the utter directionlessness and myopia (or blindness
) of the in the biological world. If 'only' is an overstatement, then surely it is
watchmaker. But, says Kauffman, "Evolution is not just 'chance caught on
the accurate to state that selection is viewed as the overwhelming source of
wing.' It is not iust a tinkering of the ad hoc, of bricolage, of contraption. It
is order in the biological world. It follows that, in our current view, organ-
emergent order honored and honed by selection" (Kauff-man 1993, p. 644).

isms are largely ad hoc solutions to design problems cobbled together by Is
he saying the watchmaker isn't blind? Of course not. But then what is he
selection. It follows that most properties which are widespread in organ-
saying? He is saying that there are principles of order that govern the design
isms are widespread by virtue of common descent from a tinkered-together
process, and that force the tinker's hand. Fine. Even a blind tinker will find
ancestor, with selective maintenance of the useful tinkerings. It follows the
forced moves; it doesn't take a rocket scientist, as one says. A tinker who
that we see organisms as overwhelmingly contingent historical accidents,
can't find the forced moves is not worth a tinker's damn, and won't design a
abetted by design. [Kauffman 1993, p. 26.]

thing. Kauffman and his colleagues have made an interesting set of
discoveries, but the attack on the image of the tinker is to a large extent, I
Kauffman wants to stress that the biological world is much more a world
think, misplaced. The tinker, says Levi-Strauss, is willing to be guided by
the of Newtonian discoveries (such as Turing's) than Shakespearean
creations, nature of the material, whereas the engineer wants the material to
be perfectly and he has certainly found some excellent demonstrations to
back up his malleable—like the concrete so beloved by the Bau-haus
architects. So the claim. But I fear that his attack on the metaphor of the
tinker feeds the tinker is a deep thinker after all, complying with
constraints, not fighting yearning of those who don't appreciate Darwin's
dangerous idea; it gives them. The truly wise engineer works not contra
naturam but secundum them a false hope that they are seeing not the forced
hand of the tinker but naturam.

the divine hand of God in the workings of nature.

One of the virtues in Kauffman's attack is that it draws attention to an
Kauffman himself has called what he is doing the quest for "the physics of
underappreciated possibility, one that we can make vivid with the help of an
biology" (Lewin 1992, p. 43), and that is not really in conflict with what I
am imaginary example from human engineering. Suppose that the Acme
Ham-calling it: meta-engineering. It is the investigation of the most general
mer Company discovers that the new hammers made by its rival, Bulldog
constraints on the processes that can lead to the creation and reproduction
of Hammer, Inc., have plastic handles with exactly the same intricate
pattern of designed things. But when he declares this a quest for "laws," he
feeds the colored whorls on them as is sported by the new Acme Model
Zeta. "Theft!"

antiengineering prejudice (or you might call it "physics envy") that distorts
so scream their legal representatives. "You copied our design!" Maybe, but
then much philosophical thinking about biology.

again, maybe not. It just might be that there is only one way of making
plastic Does anyone suppose that there are laws of nutrition? Laws of
locomotion?

handles with any strength, and that is to stir up the plastic somehow as it
sets.

There are all sorts of highly imperturbable boundary conditions on nutrition
The result is inevitably a distinctive pattern of whorls. It would be almost
and locomotion, owing to fundamental laws of physics, and there are plenty
impossible to make a serviceable plastic hammer handle that didn't have of
regularities, rules of thumb, trade-offs, and the like that are encountered by
those whorls in it, and the discovery of this fact might be one that would be
any nutritional or locomotive mechanisms. But these are not laws. They are
eventually imposed on just about anybody who tried to make a plastic like
the highly robust regularities of automotive engineering. Consider the
hammer-handle. This could explain the otherwise suspicious similarity
regularity that {ceteris paribus) ignition is accomplished only by or after the
without any hypothesis of "descent" or copying. Now, maybe the Bulldog

use of a key. There is a reason for this, of course, and it has to do with the
people did copy Acme's design, but they would have found it in any case,
perceived value of automobiles, their susceptibility to theft, the cost-
effective sooner or later. Kauffman points out that biologists tend to
overlook this sort (but not foolproof) options provided by preexisting
locksmith technology, and of possibility when they draw their inferences
about descent, and he draws so forth. When one understands the myriad
cost-benefit trade-offs of the attention to many compelling cases in the
biological world in which similarity design decisions that go into creating
automobiles, one appreciates this of pattern has nothing to do with descent.
(The most striking cases he regularity. It is not any kind of law; it is a
regularity that tends to settle out of discusses are illuminated by Turing's
1952 work on the mathematical analysis a complex set of competing
desiderata (otherwise known as norms). These of the creation of spatial
patterning in morphogenesis. ) highly reliable, norm-tracking
generalizations are not laws of automotive In a world with no discoverable
principles of design, all similarities are engineering, nor are their biological
counterparts laws of locomotion or suspicious—likely to be due to copying
(plagiarism or descent).

nutrition. The location of the mouth at the bow rather than the stern end of
the locomoting organism ( ceteris paribus— there are exceptions!) is a deep
regularity, but why call it a law? We under-

228 BIOLOGY IS ENGINEERING

stand why it should be so, because we see what mouths—or locks and keys
—

are for, and why certain ways are the best ways of accomplishing those
ends.

CHAPTER NINE

CHAPTER 8: Biology is not fust like engineering; it is engineering. It is the
study of functional mechanisms, their design, construction, and operation.

Searching for Quality

From this vantage point, we can explain the gradual birth of function, and
the concomitant birth of meaning or intentionality. Achievements that at
first seem either literally miraculous (e.g., the creation of recipe-readers
where none were before) or at least intrinsically Mind-dependent (learning
to play winning checkers) can be broken down into die ever smaller
achievements of ever smaller and stupider mechanisms. We have now begun
to pay close attention to the design process itself, not just its products, and
this new research direction is deepening Darwin's dangerous idea, not
overthrowing it.

1. THE POWER OF ADAPTATIONIST THINKING

CHAPTER 9: The task of reverse engineering in biology is an exercise in
figuring out "what Mother Nature had in mind." This strategy, known as

'Naked as Nature intended' was a persuasive slogan of the early Naturist
adaptationism, has been an amazingly powerful method, generating many
movement. But Nature's original intention was that the skin of all
spectacular leaps of inference that have been confirmed— along with some
primates should be un-naked.

that have not, of course. The famous critique of adaptationism by Stephen
Jay

—ELAINE MORGAN 1990, p. 66

Gould and Richard Lewontin focuses attention on the suspicions people
have harbored about adaptationism, but is largely misdirected. The
applications of Judging a poem is like judging a pudding or a machine. One
demands game theory in adaptationism have been particularly fruitful, but
one must be that it work. It is only because an artifact works that we infer
the cautious: there may be more hidden constraints than theorists often
assume.

intention of an artificer.

—W. WIMSATT and M. BEARDSLEY 1954, p. 4

If you know something about the design of an artifact, you can predict its
behavior without worrying yourself about the underlying physics of its
parts.

Even small children can readily learn to manipulate such complicated
objects as VCRs without having a clue as to how they work; they know just
what will happen when they press a sequence of buttons, because they
know what is designed to happen. They are operating from what I call the
design stance.

The VCR repairer knows a great deal more about the design of the VCR,
and knows, roughly, how all the interior parts interact to produce both
proper functioning and pathological functioning, but may also be quite
oblivious of the underlying physics of the processes. Only the designers of
the VCR had to understand the physics; they are the ones who must descend
to what I call the physical stance in order to figure out what sorts of design
revisions might enhance picture quality, or diminish wear and tear on the
tape, or reduce the electricity consumption of the product. But when they
engage in reverse engineering—of some other manufacturer's VCR, for
instance—they avail themselves not only of the physical stance, but also of
what I call the intentional stance—they try to figure out what the designers

230 SEARCHING FOR QUALITY

The Power of Adaptationist Thinking 231

dating from ancient Greece, is an astonishingly complex assembly of
bronze gears. What was it for? Was it a clock? Was it the machinery for
moving an automaton statue, like Vaucanson's marvels of the eighteenth
century? It was—almost certainly—an orrery or a planetarium, and the
proof is that it would be a good orrery. That is, calculations of the periods of
rotation of its wheels led to an interpretation that would have made it an
accurate ( Ptole-maic ) representation of what was then known about the
motions of the planets.

The great architectural historian Viollet-le-Duc described an object called a
cerce, used somehow in the construction of cathedral vaults.

He hypothesized that it was a movable piece of staging, used as a temporary
support for incomplete web-courses, but a later interpreter, John Fitchen (

1961), argued that this could not have been its function. For one thing, the
cerce would not have been strong enough in its extended position, and, as
figure 9.2 shows, its use would have created irregularities in the vault
webbing which are not to be found. Fitchen's extended and elaborate
FIGURE 9.1. Figure diagramming the wheel-work of the Antikythera
mechanism by Derek de-Solla Price (Yale University) had in mind. They
treat the artifact under examination as a product of a process of reasoned
design development, a series of choices among alternatives, in which the
decisions reached were those deemed best by the designers. Thinking about
the postulated functions of the parts is making assumptions about the
reasons for their presence, and this often permits one to make giant leaps of
inference that finesse one's ignorance of the Viollet-le-Duc's cerce device as
support for each web course during the erection of underlying physics, or
the lower-level design elements of the object.

the vault. The smaller-scale drawing shows a cerce, based on Viollet-le-
Duc's rep-Archeologists and historians sometimes encounter artifacts whose
mean-resentation and description. Its extended position clearly indicates
how one slotted ing—whose function or purpose—is particularly obscure. It
is instructive to board laps the other. Hung vertically as support for the
stones of a web course, it is look briefly at a few examples of such artifact
hermeneutics to see how one seen (in the detailed section) that the stones of
any given course cannot line up reasons in such cases.1

throughout: those that lean against the far board (shown in outline) tilt
much more The Antikythera mechanism, discovered in 1900 in a
shipwreck, and than those that lean against the near board (shown hatched).
As no such break does occur in the alignment of the web stone-coursing, it
is obvious that the cerce device was not used in this fashion, in spite of
Viollet-le-Duc's assertion that it was. [Fitchen 1. For an expanded analysis
of these issues, see Dennett 1990b.

1961, p. 101.]

FIGURE 9.2

232 SEARCHING FOR QUALITY

The Power of Adaptationist Thinking 233

argument concludes that the cerce was no more than an adjustable template,
a but there is no denying the fruits of the strategy. In chapters 7 and 8, we
saw conclusion he supports by coming up with a much more elegant and
versatile how the engineering perspective informs research at every level
from the solution to the problem of temporary support of web courses.

molecules on up, and how this perspective always involves distinguishing
the The important feature in these arguments is the reliance on optimality
better from the worse, and the reasons Mother Nature has found for the
considerations; it counts against the hypothesis that something is a cherry -

distinction. The intentional stance is thus the crucial lever in all attempts to
pitter, for instance, if it would have been a demonstrably inferior cherry-
reconstruct the biological past. Did Archaeopteryx, the extinct birdlike
pitter. Occasionally, an artifact loses its original function and takes on a new
creature that some have called a winged dinosaur, ever really get off the
one. People buy old-fashioned sadirons not to iron their clothes with, but to
ground? Nothing could be more ephemeral, less likely to leave a fossil
trace, use as bookends or doorstops; a handsome jam pot can become a
pencil-than a flight through the air, but if you do an engineering analysis of
its holder, and lobster traps get recycled as outdoor planters. The fact is that
claws, they turn out to be excellent adaptations for perching on branches,
not sadirons are much better as bookends than they are at ironing clothes—
when for running. An analysis of the claw curvature, supplemented by
aerodynamic compared with the competition today. And a Dec-10
mainframe computer analysis of the archaeopteryx wing structure, makes it
quite plain that the today makes a nifty heavy-duty anchor for a large boat-
mooring. No artifact creature was well designed for flight (Feduccia 1993 ).
So it almost certainly is immune from such appropriation, and however
clearly its original purpose flew—or had ancestors that flew (we mustn't
forget the possibility of excess may be read from its current form, its new
purpose may be related to that functionality persisting, like the computer in
the word-processor). The original purpose by mere historic accident—the
fellow who owned the hypothesis that the archaeopteryx flew has not yet
been fully confirmed to obsolete mainframe needed an anchor badly, and

opportunistically pressed it every expert's satisfaction, but it suggests many
further questions to address into service.

to the fossil record, and when those questions are pursued, either the
evidence The clues about such historical processes would be simply
unreadable will mount in favor of the hypothesis or it won't. The hypothesis
is testable.

without assumptions about optimality of design. Consider the so-called ded-
The lever of reverse engineering is not just for prying out secrets of icated
word-processor—the cheap, portable, glorified typewriter that uses history;
it is even more spectacular as a predictor of unimagined secrets of disk
storage and an electronic display screen, but can't be used as an all-the
present. Why are there colors? Color-coding is generally viewed as a
purpose computer. If you open up one of these devices, you find it is recent
engineering innovation, but it is not. Mother Nature discovered it governed
by an all-purpose CPU or central processing unit, such as an 8088

much earlier (for the details, see the section on why there are colors in chip
—a full-power computer vastly more powerful, swift, and versatile than
Dennett 1991a, pp. 375-83). We know this thanks to lines of research
opened the biggest computer Alan Turing ever saw—locked into menial
service, up by Karl von Frisch, and, as Richard Dawkins points out, von
Frisch used a performing a minuscule fraction of the tasks it could be
harnessed to perform.

bold exercise in reverse engineering to make the initial move.

Why is all this excess functionality found here? Martian reverse engineers
might be baffled, but there is a simple historical explanation, of course: the
Von Frisch (1967), in defiance of the prestigious orthodoxy of von Hess,
genealogy of computer development gradually lowered costs of chip
conclusively demonstrated colour vision in fish and in honeybees by con-
manufacture to the point where it was much cheaper to install a whole
trolled experiments. He was driven to undertake those experiments by his
computer-on-a-chip in a device than to build a special-purpose control
refusal to believe that, for example, the colours of flowers were there for

circuit. Notice that the explanation is historical but also, inescapably, prono
reason, or simply to delight men's eyes. [Dawkins 1982, p. 31.]

ceeds from the intentional stance. It became wise to design dedicated word-
processors this way, when the cost-benefit analysis showed that this was the
A similar inference led to the discovery of the endorphins, the morphine-
best, cheapest way to solve the problem.

like substances that we produce in our own bodies when we are put under
What is amazing is how powerful the intentional stance can be in reverse
enough stress or pain—creating the "runner's high," for instance. The rea-
engineering, not only of human artifacts, but also of organisms. In chapter
6, soning was the reverse of von Frisch's. Scientists found receptors in the
brain we saw the role of practical reasoning—cost-benefit analysis in
particular—

that are highly specific for morphine, which has a powerful painkilling
effect.

in distinguishing the forced moves from what we might call the ad lib
moves, Reverse engineering insists that wherever there is a highly particular
lock, and we saw how Mother Nature could be predicted to "discover" the
forced there must be a highly particular key to fit it. Why are these
receptors here?

moves again and again. The idea that we can impute such "free-floating
(Mother Nature could not have foreseen the development of mor-rationales"
to the mindless process of natural selection is dizzying, 234 SEARCHING
FOR QUALITY

The Power of Adaptationist Thinking

phine!) There must be some molecules produced internally under some
conditions, the original keys that these locks were designed to receive. Seek
a calls for too much growth-enhancer. The type 2 receptors are just there to
molecule that fits this receptor and is produced under circumstances in

which soak up—to "capture and degrade"—all the excess growth-enhancer
that the a shot of morphine might be beneficial. Eureka! Endogenously
created paternal chromosome would pump into the fetus if it had its way.
Since mice morphine—endorphin—was discovered.

are a species in which females tend to mate with more than one male, males
Even more devious Sherlock-Holmesian leaps of deduction have been in
effect compete to exploit the resources of each female, a competition from
executed. Here, for instance, is a general mystery: "Why do some genes
which females must protect themselves (and their own genetic
contributions).

change their pattern of expression depending on whether they are
maternally Haig and Westoby's model predicts that genes would evolve in
mice to or paternally inherited?" (Haig and Graham 1991, p. 1045). This
phe-protect females from this exploitation, and this imprinting has been
con-nomenon—in which the genome-reading machinery pays more
attention, in firmed. Moreover, their model predicts that type 2 receptors
shouldn't work effect, to either the paternal text or the maternal text—is
known as genomic this way in species in which genetic conflict of this sort
can't arise. They imprinting (for a general account, see Haig 1992), and has
been confirmed to shouldn't work this way in chickens, because offspring
can't influence how occur in special cases. What do the special cases have
in common? Haig and much yolk their eggs receive, so the tug-of-war can
never get started. Sure Westoby (1989) developed a model that purports to
solve the general mystery enough, the type 2 receptors in chickens don't
bind to IGF-II. Bertrand by predicting that genomic imprinting would be
found only in organisms "in Russell once slyly described a certain form of
illicit argument as having all which females carry offspring by more than
one male during their life span the advantages of theft over honest toil, and
one can sympathize with the and a system of parental care in which
offspring receive most of their hardworking molecular biologist who reacts
with a certain envy when some-postfertilization nutrients from one parent
(usually the mother) and thus body like Haig swoops in, saying, in effect,
"Go look under that rock—I bet compete with offspring fathered by other
males." In such circumstances, they you'll find a treasure of the following
shape!"

reasoned, there should be a conflict between maternal and paternal genes—

But that is what Haig was able to do: he predicted what Mother Nature's
paternal genes will tend to favor exploiting the mother's body as much as
move would be in the hundred-million-year game of mammal design. Of all
possible, but maternal genes would "view" this as almost suicidal—and the
the possible moves available, he saw that there was a good reason for this
result should be that the relevant genes will in effect choose sides in a tug-
of-move, so this is what would be discovered. We can get a sense of the
war, and genomic imprinting will result ( Haig and Graham 1991, p. 1046).

magnitude of the leap that such an inference takes by comparing it with a
See the model at work. There is a protein, "Insulin-like Growth Factor II"

parallel leap that we can make in the Game of Life. Recall that one of the
(IGF-II), which is, as its name suggests, a growth-enhancer. Not
surprisingly, possible denizens of the Life world is a Universal Turing
machine composed the genetic recipes of many species order the creation of
large quantities of of trillions of pixels. Since a Universal Turing machine
can compute any IGF-II during embryonic development. But, like all
functioning machines, computable function, it can play chess—simply by
mimicking the program of IGF-II needs the right supportive environment to
do its work, and in this case any chess-playing computer you like. Suppose,
then, that such an entity it needs helper molecules known as "type 1
receptors." So far, our story is just occupies the Life plane, playing chess
against itself, in the fashion of Sam-like the endorphin story: we have a type
of key (IGF-II) and a kind of lock uel's computer playing checkers against
itself. Looking at the configuration (type 1 receptors) in which it fits and
performs an obviously important role.

of dots that accomplishes this marvel would almost certainly be unillumi-
But in mice, for instance, there is another kind of lock (type 2 receptors) in
nating to anyone who had no clue that a configuration with such powers
which it also fits. What are these secondary locks for? For nothing, could
exist. But from the perspective of someone who had the hypothesis that
apparently; they are descendants of molecules that in other species (toads,
for this huge array of black dots was a chess-playing computer, enormously
instance) play a role in cells' "garbage-disposal" systems, but this is not

what efficient ways of predicting the future of that configuration are made
avail-they do when they bind to IGF-II in mice. Then why are they there?
Because able.

they are "ordered" by the genetic recipe for making a mouse, of course, but
Consider the savings you could achieve. At first you would be confronted
here is the telltale twist: whereas both the maternal and paternal
contributions by a screen on which trillions of pixels flash on and off. Since
you know the to the chromosome contain recipe instructions for making
them, these single rule of Life Physics, you could laboriously calculate the
behavior of instructions are preferentially expressed from the maternal
chromosome.

each spot on the screen if you wanted, but it would take eons. As a first
cost-Why? To counteract the instruction in the recipe that cutting step, you
could shift from thinking about individual pixels to thinking about gliders
and eaters and still lifes, and so forth. Whenever you 236 'SEARCHING
FOR QUALITY

The Power of Adaptationist Thinking

saw a glider approaching an eater, you would just predict "consumption in
sual patterns but, you might say, intellectual patterns. Squinting or twisting
four generations" without bothering with the pixel-level calculations. As a
your head in front of the computer screen is not apt to help, whereas posing
second step, you could move to thinking of the gliders as symbols on the
fanciful interpretations (or what Quine would call "analytical hypotheses")

"tape" of a gigantic Turing machine, and then, adopting this higher design
may uncover a gold mine. The opportunity confronting the observer of such
a stance towards the configuration, predict its future as a Turing machine.
At Life world is analogous to the opportunity confronting the cryptographer
this level you would be "hand-simulating" the "machine language" of a
staring at a new patch of cipher text, or the opportunity confronting the
computer program that plays chess, still a tedious way of making
predictions, Martian peering through a telescope at the Super-bowl Game. If

the Martian but orders of magnitude more efficient than working out the
physics. As a hits on the intentional stance—otherwise known as folk
psychology3—as the third and still more efficient step, you could ignore the
details of the chess-right level to look for pattern, shapes will readily
emerge through the noisy playing program itself and just assume that,
whatever they are, they are good!

jostling of people-particles and team-molecules.

That is, you could assume that the chess-playing program running on the
The scale of compression when one adopts the intentional stance towards
Turing machine made of gliders and eaters played not just legal chess but
the two-dimensional chess-playing computer galaxy is stupendous: it is the
good legal chess—it had been well designed (perhaps it has designed itself,
difference between figuring out in your head what White's most likely
(best) in the manner of Samuel's checkers program ) to find the good
moves. This chess move is versus calculating the state of a few trillion
pixels through a permits you to shift to thinking about chessboard positions,
possible chess few hundred thousand generations. But the scale of the
savings is really no moves, and the grounds for evaluating them—to shift to
reasoning about greater in the Life world than in our own. Predicting that
someone will duck reasons.

if you throw a brick at him is easy from the intentional or folk-
psychological Adopting the intentional stance towards the configuration,
you could stance; it is and will always be intractable if you have to trace the
photons predict its future as a chess-player performing intentional actions—
making from brick to eyeball, the neurotransmitters from optic nerve to
motor nerve, chess moves and trying to achieve checkmate. First you would
have to figure and so forth.

out the interpretation scheme that permits you to say which configurations
of For such vast computational leverage one might be prepared to pay quite
a pixels count as which symbols: which glider pattern spells out "QxBch"

steep price in errors, but in fact the intentional stance, used correctly,
provides (Queen takes Bishop; check) and the other symbols for chess
moves. But then a description system that permits extremely reliable

prediction of not only you could use the interpretation scheme to predict,
for instance, that the next intelligent human behavior, but also the
"intelligent behavior" of the process configuration to emerge from the
galaxy would be such-and-such a glider that designed organisms. All this
would warm William Paley's heart. We can stream—say, the symbols for
"RxQ" (Rook takes Queen). There is risk put the burden of proof on the
skeptics with a simple challenge argument: if involved, because the chess
program being run on the Turing machine may there weren't design in the
biosphere, how come the intentional stance works?

be far from perfectly rational, and, at a different level, debris may wander
We can even get a rough measure of the design in the biosphere by
comparing onto the scene and "break" the Turing-machine configuration
before it the cost of making predictions from the lowest-level physical
stance (which finishes the game. But if all goes well, as it normally will, if
you have the assumes no design—well, almost no design, depending on
how we treat the right interpretation, you can astonish your friends by
saying something like "I evolution of universes) with the cost of making
predictions from the higher predict that the next stream of gliders to emerge
in location L in this Life stances: the design stance and the intentional
stance. The added leverage of galaxy will have the following pattern: a
singleton, followed by a group of prediction, the diminution of uncertainty,
the shrinkage of the huge search three, followed by another singleton ..."
How on Earth were you able to space to a few optimal or

predict that that particular "molecular" pattern would appear then?2

In other words, real but (potentially) noisy patterns abound in such a
configuration of the Life world, there for the picking up if only you are
lucky or clever enough to hit on the right perspective. They are not vi-3.1
introduced the term "folk psychology" in 1978 (Dennett 1981, 1987b) as the
name for the natural, perhaps even partly innate, talent human beings have
for adopting the intentional stance. See Baron-Cohen 1995 for a fascinating
contribution to the current state of play. There is more agreement among
philosophers and psychologists about the 2. In case you wondered, I
imagined "RxQ" to be spelled out in Morse code, and "R" in existence of the

talent than there is about my analysis of it. See, for instance, the recent
Morse is dot-dash-dot—the group of three gliders counts as a dash.

anthologies on the topic—Greenwood 1991, and Christensen and Turner
1993. See Dennett 1987b, 1990b, and 1991b for my account.

238 SEARCHING FOR QUALITY

The Leibnizian Paradigm 239

near-optimal paths, is a measure of the design that is observable in the
world.

what it is to be a possible world, and on what we can infer about the actual
The biologists' name for this style of reasoning is adaptationism It is world
from the fact of its actuality. In Candide, Voltaire created a famous defined
by one of its most eminent critics as the "growing tendency in caricature of
Leibniz, Dr. Pangloss, the learned fool who could rationalize evolutionary
biology to reconstruct or predict evolutionary events by as-any calamity or
deformity—from the Lisbon earthquake to venereal dis-suming that all
characters are established in evolution by direct natural ease—and show
how, no doubt, it was all for the best. Nothing in principle selection of the
most adapted state, that is, the state that is an optimum could prove that this
was not the best of all possible worlds.

'solution' to a 'problem' posed by the environment" (Lewontin 1983). These
Gould and Lewontin memorably dubbed the excesses of adaptationism the
critics claim that, although adaptationism plays some important role in

"Panglossian Paradigm," and strove to ridicule it off the stage of serious
biology, it is not really all that central or ubiquitous—and, indeed, we
should science. They were not the first to use "Panglossian" as a term of
criticism in try to balance it with other ways of thinking. I have been
showing, however, evolutionary theory. The evolutionary biologist J. B. S.
Haldane had a that it plays a crucial role in the analysis of every biological
event at every famous list of three "theorems" of bad scientific argument:
the Bellman's scale from the creation of the first self-replicating
macromolecule on up. If Theorem ("What I tell you three times is true";

from "The Hunting of the we gave up adaptationist reasoning, for instance,
we would have to give up Snark" by Lewis Carroll), Aunt Jobisca's
Theorem ("It's a fact the whole the best textbook argument for the very
occurrence of evolution (I quoted world knows"; from Edward Lear, "The
Pobble Who Had No Toes"), and Mark Ridley's version of it on page 136):
the widespread existence of Pangloss's Theorem ("All is for the best in this
best of all possible worlds"; homologies, those suspicious similarities of
design that are not functionally from Candide). John Maynard Smith then
used the last of these more par-necessary.

ticularly to name "the old Panglossian fallacy that natural selection favours
Adaptationist reasoning is not optional; it is the heart and soul of evolu-
adaptations that are good for the species as a whole, rather than acting at the
tionary biology. Although it may be supplemented, and its flaws repaired, to
level of the individual." As he later commented, "It is ironic that the phrase
think of displacing it from central position in biology is to imagine not just

'Pangloss's theorem' was first used in the debate about evolution (in print, I
the downfall of Darwinism but the collapse of modern biochemistry and all
think, by myself, but borrowed from a remark of Haldane's), not as a the life
sciences and medicine. So it is a bit surprising to discover that this is
criticism of adaptive explanations, but specifically as a criticism of 'group-
precisely the interpretation that many readers have placed on the most
selectionist', mean-fitness-maximising arguments" (Maynard Smith 1988, p.

famous and influential critique of adaptationism, Stephen Jay Gould and
88). But Maynard Smith is wrong, apparently. Gould has recently drawn
Richard Lewontin's oft-cited, oft-reprinted, but massively misread classic,
attention to a still earlier use of the term by a biologist, William Bateson

"The Spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian Paradigm: A Critique of
the Adaptationist Programme" (1979).

(1909), of which he, Gould, had been unaware when he chose to use the
term.

As Gould (1993a, p. 312) says, "The convergence is hardly surprising, as
Dr.

Pangloss is a standard synecdoche for this form of ridicule." As we saw in
2. T

chapter 6, the more apt or fitting a brainchild is, the more likely it is to be
HE LEIBNIZIAN PARADIGM

born (or borrowed) independently in more than one brain.

Voltaire created Pangloss as a parody of Leibniz, and it is exaggerated and
If, among all the possible worlds, none had been better than the rest, then
unfair to Leibniz—as all good parody is. Gould and Lewontin similarly car-
God would never have created one.

icatured adaptationism in their article attacking it, so parity of reasoning

—GOTTFRIED WILHELM LEIBNIZ 1710

suggests that, if we wanted to undo the damage of that caricature, and The
study of adaptation is not an optional preoccupation with fascinating
describe adaptationism in an accurate and constructive way, we would have
a fragments of natural history, it is the core of biological study.

title ready-made: we could call adaptationism, fairly considered, the
"Leibnizian Paradigm."

—COLIN PITTENDRIGH 1958, p. 395

The Gould and Lewontin article has had a curious effect on the academic
Leibniz, notoriously, said that this was the best of all possible worlds, a
world. It is widely regarded by philosophers and other humanists who have
striking suggestion that might seem preposterous from a distance, but turns
heard of it or even read it as some sort of refutation of adaptationism.
Indeed, out, as we have seen, to throw an interesting light on the deep
questions of I first learned of it from the philosopher/psychologist Jerry
Fodor, a lifelong critic of my account of the intentional stance, who pointed
out that 240 SEARCHING FOR QUALITY

The Leibnizian Paradigm 241

what I was saying was pure adaptationism (he was right about that), and
went But in fact the role of optimality assumptions in Fisher's work—
beyond the on to let me in on what the cognoscenti all knew: Gould and
Lewontin's explicit role that Eldredge conceded—is so "vital" and indeed
omnipresent article had shown adaptationism "to be completely bankrupt."
(For an that Eldredge entirely overlooked it. For instance, Fisher's inference
that the instance of Fodor's view in print, see Fodor 1990, p. 70.) When I
looked into Jurassic crabs swam at 15-20 cm/sec has as a tacit premise that
those crabs it, I found out otherwise. In 1983, I published a paper in
Behavioral and swam at the optimal speed for their design. ( How does he
know they swam Brain Sciences, "Intentional Systems in Cognitive
Ethology," and since it at all? Perhaps they just lay there, oblivious of the
excess functionality of was unabashedly adaptationist in its reasoning, I
included a coda, "The their body shapes.) Without this tacit (and, of course,
dead obvious) premise,

'Panglossian Paradigm' Defended," which criticized both Gould and no
conclusion at all could be drawn about what the actual swimming speed of
Lewontin's paper and—more particularly—the bizarre myth that had grown
the Jurassic variety was.

up around it.

Michael Ghiselin (1983, p. 363 ) was even more forthright in denying this
The results were fascinating. Every article that appears in BBS is accom-
unobvious obvious dependence:

panied by several dozen commentaries by experts in the relevant fields, and
my piece drew fire from evolutionary biologists, psychologists, ethologists,
Panglossianism is bad because it asks the wrong question, namely, What is
and philosophers, most of it friendly but some remarkably hostile. One
thing good?... The alternative is to reject such teleology altogether. Instead
of was clear: it was not just some philosophers and psychologists who were
asking, What is good? we ask, What has happened? The new question does
uncomfortable with adaptationist reasoning. In addition to the evolutionary
everything we could expect the old one to do, and a lot more besides.

theorists who weighed in enthusiastically on my side (Dawkins 1983b,
Maynard Smith 1983), and those who fought back (Lewontin 1983), there
He was fooling himself. There is hardly a single answer to the question
were those who, though they agreed with me that Gould and Lewontin had

"What has happened (in the biosphere)?" that doesn't depend crucially on
not refuted adaptationism, were eager to downplay the standard use of
assumptions about what is good.4 As we just noted, you can't even avail
optimality assumptions that I claimed to be an essential ingredient in all
yourself of the concept of a homology without taking on adaptationism,
evolutionary thinking.

without taking the intentional stance.

Niles Eldredge (1983, p. 361) discussed the reverse engineering of func-So
now what is the problem? It is the problem of how to tell good—

tional morphologists: "You will find sober analyses of fulcra, force vectors
irreplaceable—adaptationism from bad adaptationism, how to tell Leibniz
and so forth: the understanding of anatomy as a living machine. Some of
this from Pangloss.5 Surely one reason for the extraordinary influence of
Gould stuff is very good. Some of it is absolutely dreadful." He went on to
cite, as an example of good reverse engineering, the work of Dan Fisher
(1975) comparing modern horseshoe crabs with their Jurassic ancestors: 4.
Doesn't my assertion fly in the face of the claims of those cladists who
purport to deduce Assuming only that Jurassic horseshoe crabs also swam
on their backs, history from a statistical analysis of shared and unshared
"characters"? ( For a philosophical Fisher showed they must have swum at
an angle of 0-10 degrees (flat on survey and discussion, see Sober 1988.)
Yes, 1 guess it does, and my review of their ar-their backs) and at the
somewhat greater speed of 15-20 cm/sec. Thus the guments (largely via
Sober's analyses ) shows me that the difficulties they create for them-

'adaptive significance' of the slight differences in anatomy between modern
selves are largely if not entirely due to their trying so hard to find non-
adaptationist ways horseshoe crabs and their 150-million-year-old relatives
is translated into of drawing the sound inferences that are dead obvious to
adaptationists. For instance, those an understanding of their slightly

different swimming capabilities. (In all cladists who abstain from adaptation
talk cannot just help themselves to the obvious fact honesty, I must also
report that Fisher does use optimality in his argu-that haying webbed feet is
a pretty good "character" and having dirty feet (when examined) is not.
Like the behaviorists who pretended to be able to explain and predict "be-
ments: He sees the differences between the two species as a sort of trade-
havior" defined in the starkly uninterpreted language of geographical
trajectory of body off, where the slightly more efficient Jurassic swimmers
appear to have parts, instead of using the richly functionalistic language of
searching, eating, hiding, chas-used the same pieces of anatomy to burrow
somewhat less efficiently than ing, and so forth, the abstemious cladists
create majestic edifices of intricate theory, which their modern-day
relatives). In any case, Fisher's work stands as a really is amazing,
considering they do it with one hand tied behind their backs, but strange,
con-good example of functional morphological analysis. The notion of
adapta-sidering that they wouldn't have to do it at all if they didn't insist on
tying one hand behind tion is naught but conceptual filigree—one that may
have played a role in their backs. (See also Dawkins 1986a, ch. 10, and
Mark Ridley 1985, ch. 6.) motivating the research, but one that was not
vital to the research itself.

5. The myth that the point of the Gould and Lewontin paper was to destroy
adaptation-

[Eldredge 1983, p. 362.]

ism, not correct its excesses, was fostered by the paper's rhetoric, but in
some quarters it backfired on Gould and Lewontin, since adaptationists
themselves tended to pay more

242 SEARCHING FOR QUALITY

The Leibnizian Paradigm 243

Calvin and Hobbes

by Bill Watterson

me" call. They follow as the bird darts ahead and waits for them to catch
up, always making sure they can see where it's heading. When the bird
reaches the hive, it changes its tune, giving the "here-we-are" call. When
the Boran locate the beehive in the tree and break into it, they take the
honey, leaving wax and larvae for the honey guide. Now, don't you ache to
believe that this wonderful partnership actually exists, and has the clever
functional properties described? Don't you want to believe that such a
marvel could have evolved under some imagined series of selection
pressures and opportunities? I certainly do. And, happily, in this case, the
follow-up research is confirming the story, and even adding nifty touches as
it does so. Recent controlled tests, CALVIN AND HOBBES copyright 1993
Watterson. Reprinted with permission of UNIVERSAL PRESS

for instance, showed that the Boran honey-hunters took much longer to find
SYNDICATE. All rights reserved.

hives without the help of the birds, and 96 percent of the 186 hives found
FIGURE 9.3

during the study were encased in trees in ways that would have made them
inaccessible to the birds without human assistance (Isack and Reyer 1989).

and Lewontin's paper (among nonevolutionists) is that it expressed, with
Another fascinating story, which strikes closer to home, is the hypothesis
many fine rhetorical flourishes, what Eldredge called the "backlash" against
that our species, Homo sapiens, descended from earlier primates via an the
concept of adaptationism among biologists. What were they reacting
intermediate species that was aquatic (Hardy I960, Morgan 1982, 1990)!

against? In the main, they were reacting against a certain sort of laziness:
the These aquatic apes purportedly lived on the shores of an island formed
by the adaptationist who hits upon a truly nifty explanation for why a
particular flooding of the area that is now in Ethiopia, during the late
Miocene, about circumstance should prevail, and then never bothers to test
it—because it is seven million years ago. Cut off by the flooding from their
cousins on the too good a story, presumably, not to be true. Adopting
another literary label, African continent, and challenged by a relatively
sudden change in their this time from Rudyard Kipling (1912), Gould and
Lewontin call such climate and food sources, they developed a taste for
shellfish, and over a explanations "Just So Stories." It is an enticing
historical curiosity that period of a million years or so they began the
evolutionary process of Kipling wrote his Just So Stories at a time when
this objection to Darwinian returning to the sea that we know was
undergone earlier by whales, dolphins, explanation had already been
swirling around for decades;6 forms of it were seals, and otters, for
instance. The process was well under way, leading to the raised by some of
Darwin's earliest critics (Kitcher 1985a, p. 156). Was fixation of many
curious characteristics that are otherwise found only in Kipling inspired by
the controversy? In any case, calling the adaptationists'

aquatic mammals—not in any other primate, for example— when flights of
imagination "Just So Stories" hardly does them credit; as delightful
circumstances changed once again, and these semi-seagoing apes returned
to as I have always found Kipling's fantasies about how the elephant got its
a life on the land (but typically on the shore of sea, lake, or river ). There,
trunk, and the leopard got its spots, they are quite simple and unsurprising
they found that many of the adaptations they had developed for good
reasons tales compared with the amazing hypotheses that have been
concocted by in their shell-diving days were not only not valuable but a
positive hindrance.

adaptationists.

They soon turned these handicaps to good uses, however, or at least made
Consider the greater honey guide, Indicator indicator, an African bird that
compensations for them: their upright, bipedal posture, their subcutaneous

owes its name to its talent for leading human beings to wild beehives
hidden layer of fat, their hairlessness, perspiration, tears, inability to
respond to salt in the forest. When the Boran people of Kenya want to find
honey, they call deprivation in standard mammalian ways, and, of course,
the diving reflex—

for the bird by blowing on whistles made of sculpted snail shells. When a
which permits even newborn human infants to survive sudden submersion
in bird arrives, it flies around them, singing a special song—its "follow-
water for long periods with no ill effects. The details—and there are many,
many more—are so ingenious, and the whole aquatic-ape theory is so
shockingly antiestablishment, that I for one would love to see it vindicated.

That does not make it true, of course.

attention to the rhetoric than the arguments: "The critique by Gould and
Lewontin has The fact that its principal exponent these days is not only a
woman, Elaine had little impact on practitioners, perhaps because they were
seen as hostile to the whole enterprise, and not merely to careless practise
of it" (Maynard Smith 1988, p. 89).

Morgan, but an amateur, a science writer without proper official credentials
6. Kipling began publishing the individual stories in 1897.

244 SEARCHING FOR QUALITY

The Leibnizian Paradigm 245

in spite of her substantial researches, makes the prospect of vindication all
the responded with admirable clarity, however, to the objections that had
been more enticing.7 The establishment has responded quite ferociously to
her lodged to date, and usefully contrasted the strengths and weaknesses of
the challenges, mostly treating them as beneath notice, but occasionally
aquatic-ape theory to those of the establishment's history. And, more
recently subjecting them to withering rebuttal.8 This is not necessarily a
pathological still, a book has appeared that collects essays by a variety of
experts, for and reaction. Most uncredentialed proponents of scientific
"revolutions" are against the aquatic-ape theory: Roede et al. 1991. The

tentative verdict of the kooks who really are not worth paying any attention
to. There really are a lot organizers of the 1987 conference from which that
book sprang (p. 324 ) is of them besieging us, and life is too short to give
each uninvited hypothesis that, "while there are a number of arguments
favoring the AAT, they are not its proper day in court. But in this case, I
wonder; many of the sufficiently convincing to counteract the arguments
against it." That judicious counterarguments seem awfully thin and ad hoc.
During the last few years, note of mild disparagement helps ensure that the
argument will continue, when I have found myself in the company of
distinguished biologists, evo-perhaps even with less rancor; it will be
interesting to see where it all comes lutionary theorists, paleo-
anthropologists, and other experts, I have often out.

asked them just to tell me, please, exactly why Elaine Morgan must be
wrong My point in raising the aquatic-ape theory is not to defend it against
the about the aquatic-ape theory. I haven't yet had a reply worth mentioning,
establishment view, but to use it as an illustration of a deeper worry. Many
aside from those who admit, with a twinkle in their eyes, that they have
often biologists would like to say, "A pox on both your houses!" Morgan
(1990) wondered the same thing. There seems to be nothing inherently
impossible deftly exposes the hand-waving and wishful thinking that have
gone into the about the idea, other mammals have made the plunge, after
all. Why couldn't establishment's tale about how—and why— Homo
sapiens developed biped-our ancestors have started back into the ocean and
then retreated, bearing alism, sweating, and hairlessness on the savanna, not
the seashore. Their some telltale scars of this history?

stories may not be literally as fishy as hers, but some of them are pretty
Morgan may be "accused" of telling a good story—she certainly has—but
farfetched; they are every bit as speculative, and (I venture to say ) no better
not of declining to try to test it. On the contrary, she has used the story as
confirmed. What they mainly have going for them, so far as I can see, is
that leverage to coax a host of surprising predictions out of a variety of
fields, and they occupied the high ground in the textbooks before Hardy and
Morgan has been willing to adjust her theory when the results have
demanded it.

tried to dislodge them. Both sides are indulging in adaptationist Just So
Otherwise, she has stuck to her guns and, in fact, invited attack on her
views Stories, and since some story or other must be true, we must not
conclude we through the vehemence of her partisanship. As so often
happens in such a have found the story just because we have come up with
a story that seems to confrontation, the intransigence and defensiveness, on
both sides, have begun fit the facts. To the extent that adaptationists have
been less than energetic in to take their toll, creating one of those spectacles
that then discourage anyone seeking further confirmation (or dreaded
disconfirmation) of their stories, this who just wants to know the truth from
having anything more to do with the is certainly an excess that deserves
criticism.9

subject. Morgan's latest book on the topic (1990)

But before leaving it at that, I want to point out that there are many
adaptationist stories that everybody is happy to accept even though they 7.
Sir Alister Hardy, the Linacre Professor of Zoology at Oxford, who
originally proposed the theory, could hardly have been a more secure
member of the scientific establishment, 9. The geneticist Steve Jones (
1993, p. 20 ) gives us another case in point: There are more however.

than three hundred strikingly different species of cichlid fish in Lake
Victoria. They are so different; how did they get there? "The conventional
view is that Lake Victoria must once 8. For instance, there is no mention at
all of the aquatic-ape theory, not even to dismiss have dried up into many
small lakes to allow each species to evolve. Apart from the fish it, in two
recent coffee-table books that include chapters on human evolution. Philip
themselves, there is no evidence that this ever happened." Adaptationist
stories do get Whitfield's From So Simple a Beginning: The Book of
Evolution (1993) offers a few disconfirmed and abandoned, however. My
favorite example is the now-discredited ex-paragraphs on the standard
savanna theory of bipedalism. "The Primates' Progress," by planation of
why certain sea turtles migrate all the way across the Atlantic between
Africa Peter Andrews and Christopher Stringer, is a much longer essay on
hominid evolution, in and South America, spawning on one side, feeding on
the other. According to this all-The Book of Life (Stephen Jay Gould, ed.,

1993b), but it, too, ignores the aquatic-ape too-reasonable story, the habit
started when Africa and South America were first begin-theory—the AAT.
And, adding insult to oblivion, there has also been a wickedly funny ning to
split apart; at that time, the turtles were just going across the bay to spawn;
the parody of it by Donald Symons (1983), exploring the radical hypothesis
that our ances-distance grew imperceptibly longer over the eons, until their
descendants dutifully cross tors used to fly—"The flying on air theory—
FLOAT, as it is acronymously (acrimonian ocean to get to where their
instinct still tells them to spawn. I gather that the timing ously, among the
reactionary human evolution 'establishment')." For an overview of the of the
breakup of Gondwanaland turns out not to match the evolutionary timetable
for reactions, see G. Richards 1991

the turtles, sad to say, but wasn't it a cute idea?

The Leibnizian Paradigm 247

246 SEARCHING FOR QUALITY

The answer—which makes beautiful sense, in retrospect—is that, by having
have never been "properly tested," just because they are too obviously true
to a large prime number of years between appearances, the cicadas
minimize be worth further testing. Does anybody seriously doubt that
eyelids evolved the likelihood of being discovered and later tracked as a
predictable feast by to protect the eye? But that very obviousness may hide
good research predators who themselves show up every two years, or three
years, or five questions from us. George Williams points out that concealed
behind such years. If the cicadas had a periodicity of, say, sixteen years,
then they would obvious facts may lie others that are well worth further
investigation: be a rare treat for predators who showed up every year, but a
more reliable A human eye blink takes about 50 milliseconds. That means
that we are source of food for predators who showed up every two or four
years, and an blind about 5% of the time when we are using our eyes
normally. Many even-money gamble for predators that got in phase with
them on an eight-events of importance can happen in 50 milliseconds, so
that we might miss year schedule. If their period is not a multiple of any
lower number, however, them entirely. A rock or spear thrown by a
powerful adversary can travel they are a rare treat—not worth "trying" to

track—for any species that isn't more than a meter in 50 milliseconds, and it
could be important to per-lucky enough to have exactly their periodicity (or
some multiple of it—the ceive such motion as accurately as possible. Why
do we blink with both mythical Thirty-four-Year Locust-Muncher would be
in fat city). I don't eyes simultaneously? Why not alternate and replace 95%
visual attentive-know whether Lloyd and Dybas' Just So Story has been
properly confirmed ness with 100% ? I can imagine an answer in some sort
of trade-off balance.

yet, but I don't think Gould is guilty of Panglossianism in treating it as A
blink mechanism for both eyes at once may be much simpler and cheaper
established until proven otherwise. And if he really wants to ask and answer
than one that regularly alternates. [G. Williams 1992, pp. 152-53]

"why" questions, he has no choice but to be an adaptationist.

The problem he and Lewontin perceive is that there are no standards for
Williams has not himself yet attempted to confirm or disconnrm any hy-
when a particular bit of adaptationist reasoning is too much of a good thing.

pothesis growing out of this exemplary piece of adaptationist problem-How
serious, really, is this problem even if it has no principled "solution"?

setting, but he has called for the research by asking the question. It would
be Darwin has taught us not to look for essences, for dividing lines between
as pure an exercise in reverse engineering as can be imagined.

genuine function or genuine intentionality and mere on-its-way-to-being
function or intentionality. We commit a fundamental error if we think that if
Serious consideration of why natural selection permits simultaneous blink-
we want to indulge in adaptationist thinking we need a license and the only
ing might yield otherwise elusive insights. What change in the machinery
license could be the possession of a strict definition of or criterion for a
would be needed to produce the first step towards my envisioned adaptive
genuine adaptation. There are good rules of thumb to be followed by the
alternation or simple independent timing? How might the change be
prospective reverse engineer, made explicit years ago by George Williams (

achieved developmentally? What other changes would be expected from a
1966). ( 1) Don't invoke adaptation when other, lower-level, explanations
are mutation that produced a slight lag in the blinking of one eye? How
would available (such as physics). We don't have to ask what advantage
accrues to selection act on such a mutation? [G. Williams 1992, p. 153]

maple trees that explains the tendency of their leaves to fall down, any more
than the reverse engineers at Raytheon need to hunt for a reason why GE

Gould himself has endorsed some of the most daring and delicious of made
their widgets so that they would melt readily in blast furnaces. (2) Don't
adaptationist Just So Stories, such as the argument by Lloyd and Dybas
invoke adaptation when a feature is the outcome of some general (1966)
explaining why cicadas (such as "seventeen-year locusts") have
developmental requirement. We don't need a special reason of increased
reproductive cycles that are prime-numbered years long—thirteen years, or
fitness to explain the fact that heads are attached to bodies, or limbs come in
seventeen, but never fifteen or sixteen, for instance. "As evolutionists,"
Gould pairs, any more than the people at Raytheon need to explain why the
parts in says, "we seek answers to the question, why. Why, in particular,
should such GE's widget have so many edges and corners with right angles.
( 3 ) Don't striking synchroneity evolve, and why should the period between
episodes of invoke adaptation when a feature is a by-product of another
adaptation. We sexual reproduction be so long?" (Gould 1977a, p. 99 ).10

don't need to give an adaptationist explanation of the capacity of a bird's
beak to groom its feathers (since the features of the

10. Gould has recently ( 1993a, p. 318) described his antiadaptationism as
the "zeal of the Gould's attitude towards adaptationism is not so easily
discerned, however. The Book of convert," and elsewhere ( 1991b, p. 13)
confesses, "I sometimes wish that all copies of Life ( 1993b) is packed with
adaptationist reasoning that made it past his red pencil, and Ever Since
Darwin would self-destruct," so perhaps he would recant these words today,
thus presumably has his endorsement.

which would be a pity, since they eloquently express the rationale of
adaptationism.

248 SEARCHING FOR QUALITY

The Leibnizian Paradigm 249

bird's beak are there for more pressing reasons), any more than we need a in
drawing up and criticizing various legislative regimes. They are just not
special explanation of the capacity of the GE widget's casing to shield the
being Darwinian enough in their thinking. Better adaptationist thinking
soon innards from ultraviolet rays.

drives out its rivals by normal channels, just as second-rate reverse But you
will already have noticed that in each case these rules of thumb engineering
betrays itself sooner or later.

can be overridden by a more ambitious inquiry. Suppose someone
marveling at the brilliant autumn foliage in New England asks why the
maple leaves are The eskimo face, once depicted as 'cold engineered' (Coon
et al., 1950) so vividly colored in October. Isn't this adaptationism run
amok? Shades of becomes an adaptation to generate and withstand large
masticatory forces Dr. Pangloss! The leaves are the colors they are simply
because once the (Shea, 1977). We do not attack these newer
interpretations; they may all summer energy-harvest season is over, the
chlorophyll vanishes from the be right. We do wonder, though, whether the
failure of one adaptive leaves, and the residual molecules have reflective
properties that happen to explanation should always simply inspire a search
for another of the same determine the bright colors—an explanation at the
level of chemistry or general form, rather than a consideration of
alternatives to the proposition physics, not biological purpose. But wait.
Although this may have been the that each part is 'for' some specific
purpose. [Gould and Lewontin 1979, p.

only explanation that was true up until now, today it is true that human
beings 152.)

so prize the autumn foliage (it brings millions of tourist dollars to northern
New England each year) that they protect the trees that are brightest in Is
the rise and fall of successive adaptive explanations of various things a
autumn. You can be sure that if you are a tree competing for life in New

sign of healthy science constantly improving its vision, or is it like the
England, there is now a selective advantage to having bright autumn
foliage.

pathological story-shifting of the compulsive fibber? If Gould and Lewontin
It may be tiny, and in the long run it may never amount to much (in the long
had a serious alternative to adaptationism to offer, their case for the latter
run, there may be no trees at all in New England, for one reason or another),
verdict would be more persuasive, but although they and others have hunted
but this is how all adaptations get their start, after all, as fortuitous effects
that around energetically, and promoted their alternatives boldly, none has
yet get opportunistically picked up by selective forces in the environment.
And of taken root.

course there is also an adaptationist explanation for why right angles
predominate in manufactured goods, and why symmetry predominates in
Adaptationism, the paradigm that views organisms as complex adaptive
organic limb-manufacturing. These may become utterly fixed traditions,
machines whose parts have adaptive functions subsidiary to the fitness-
which would be almost impossible to dislodge by innovation, but the
reasons promoting function of the whole, is today about as basic to biology
as the why these are the traditions are not hard to find, or controversial.

atomic theory is to chemistry. And about as controversial. Explicitly ad-
Adaptationist research always leaves unanswered questions open for the
aptationist approaches are ascendant in the sciences of ecology, ethology,
next round. Consider the leatherback sea turtle and her eggs: and evolution
because they have proven essential to discovery; if you doubt this claim,
look at the journals. Gould and Lewontin's call for an Near the end of egg
laying, a variable number of small, sometimes mis-alternative paradigm has
failed to impress practicing biologists both be-shapen eggs, containing
neither embryo nor yolk (just albumin) are de-cause adaptationism is
successful and well-founded, and because its critics posited. Their purpose
is not well understood, but they become desiccated have no alternative
research program to offer. Each year sees the estab-over the course of
incubation and may moderate humidity or air volume lishment of such new
journals as Functional Biology and Behavioral Ecol-in the incubation

chamber. (It is also possible that they have no function ogy. Sufficient
research to fill a first issue of Dialectical Biology has yet to or are a vestige
of some past mechanisms not apparent to us today.) materialize. [Daly
1991, p. 219.]

[Eckert 1992, p. 30]

What particularly infuriates Gould and Lewontin, as the passage about the
But where does it all end? Such open-endedness of adaptationist curiosity
Eskimo face suggests, is the blithe confidence with which adaptationists go
is unnerving to many theorists, apparently, who wish there could be stricter
about their reverse engineering, always sure that sooner or later they will
find codes of conduct for this part of science. Many who have hoped to
contribute the reason why things are as they are, even if it so far eludes
them. Here is an to clearing up the controversy over adaptationism and its
backlash have instance, drawn from Richard Dawkins' discussion of the
curious case of the despaired of finding such codes, after much energy has
been expended flatfish (flounders and soles, for instance ) who when they
are born are vertical fish, like herring or sunfish, but whose skulls undergo a
weird twist-250 SEARCHING FOR QUALITY

Playing with Constraints 251

ing transformation, moving one eye to the other side, which then becomes
Dawkins' adaptive scenarios make no mention of the costs of allegedly the
top of the bottom-dwelling fish. Why didn't they evolve like those other
adaptive changes. Mimicry might deceive potential mates as well as po-
bottom-dwellers, skates, which are not on their side but on their belly, "like
tential predators.... Still, I do think this objection is something of a quibble
sharks that have passed under a steam roller" (Dawkins 1986a, p. 91)?

because essentially I agree that natural selection is the only possible
Dawkins imagines a scenario (pp. 92-93):

explanation of complex adaptation. So something like Dawkins' stories
have got to be right. [Sterelny 1988, p. 424.]11

... even though the skate way of being a flat fish might ultimately have been
the best design for bony fish too, the would-be intermediates that set out
along this evolutionary pathway apparently did less well in the short 3.
PLAYING WITH CONSTRAINTS

term than their rivals lying on their side. The rivals lying on their side were
so much better, in the short term, at hugging the bottom. In genetic It is just
as foolish to complain that people are selfish and treacherous hyperspace,
there is a smooth trajectory connecting free-swimming ances-as it is to
complain that the magnetic field does not increase unless the tral bony fish
to flatfish lying on their side with twisted skulls. There is not a smooth
trajectory connecting these bony fish ancestors to flatfish lying electric field
hasa curl.

on their belly. There is such a trajectory in theory, but it passes through

—JOHN VON NEUMANN, quoted in William

intermediates that would have been—in the short term, which is all that
Poundstone 1992, p. 235

matters—unsuccessful if they had ever been called into existence.

As a general rule today a biologist seeing one animal doing something to
benefit another assumes either that it is manipulated by the other Does
Dawkins know this? Does he know that the postulated intermediates
individual or drat it is being subtly selfish.

were less fit? Not because he has seen any data drawn from the fossil
record.

This is a purely theory-driven explanation, argued a priori from the

—GEORGE WILLIAMS 1988, p. 391

assumption that natural selection tells us the true story—some true story or
One may nevertheless be reasonably nervous about the size of the role of
other—about every curious feature of the biosphere. Is that objectionable?

It sheer, unfettered imagination in adaptationist thinking. What about
butterflies does "beg the question"—but what a question it begs! It assumes
that with tiny machine guns for self-protection? This fantastic example is
often Darwinism is basically on the right track. (Is it objectionable when
mete-cited as the sort of option that can be dismissed without detailed
analysis by orologists say, begging the question against supernatural forces,
that there adaptationists seeking to describe the ensemble of possible
butterfly must be a purely physical explanation for the birth of hurricanes,
even if adaptations from which Mother Nature has chosen the best, all
things many of the details so far elude them?) Notice that in this instance,
Dawkins'

considered. It is just too distant a possibility in design space to be taken
explanation is almost certainly right—there is nothing especially daring
about seriously. But as Richard Lewontin (1987, p. 156) aptly notes, "My
guess is that particular speculation. Moreover, it is, of course, exactly the
sort of that if fungus-gardening ants had never been seen, the suggestion
that this thinking a good reverse engineer should do. "It seems so obvious
that this was a reasonable possibility for ant evolution would have been
regarded as General Electric widget casing ought to be made of two pieces,
not three, but silly." Adaptationists are masters of the retrospective
rationale, like the it's made of three pieces, which is wasteful and more apt
to leak, so we can be damn sure that three pieces was seen as better than
two in somebody's eyes, shortsighted though they may have been. Keep
looking!" The philosopher of biology Kim Sterelny, in a review of The
Blind Watchmaker, made the point 11. Dawkins is not content to rest with
Sterelny's dismissal of his own objections as this way:

"quibbles" since, he points out (personal communication), they raise an
important point often misunderstood: "It is not up to individual humans like
Sterelny to express their own Dawkins is admittedly giving only scenarios:
showing that it's conceivable commonsense scepticism of the proposition
that 5% like a stick is significantly better than 4%. It is an easy rhetorical
point to make: 'Come on, are you really trying to tell me that ( e.g.) wings
could evolve gradually under natural selection. Even so, that 5% like a stick
really matters when compared to 4%?' This rhetoric will often one could
quibble. Is it really true that natural selection is so fine-grained convince

laymen, but the population genetic calculations (e.g. by Haldane) belie
com-that, for a protostick insect, looking 5% like a stick is better than
looking mon sense in a fascinating and illuminating way: because natural
selection works on 4% like one? (pp. 82-83). A worry like this is especially
pressing because genes distributed over many individuals and over many
millions of years, human actuarial intuitions are over-ruled."

252 SEARCHING FOR QUALITY

Playing with Constraints 253

chess-player who only notices after he's made the move that it forces check-
scribe his own actions but not those of the others. Nevertheless those mate
in two moves. "How brilliant—and I almost thought of it!" But before alien'
variables cannot, from his point of view, be described by statistical we
decide that this is zflaw in adaptationist character or method, we should
assumptions. This is because the others are guided, just as he himself, by
remind ourselves that this retrospective endorsement of brilliance is the way
rational principles—whatever that may mean—and no modus procedendi
Mother Nature herself always operates. Adaptationists should hardly be can
be correct which does not attempt to understand those principles and faulted
for being unable to predict the brilliant moves that Mother Nature the
interactions of the conflicting interests of all participants. [Von Neu-herself
was oblivious of until she'd stumbled upon them.

mann and Morgenstern 1944, p. 11.]

The perspective of game-playing is ubiquitous in adaptationism, where
mathematical game theory has played a growing role ever since its intro-
The fundamental insight that unites game theory and evolutionary theory is
duction into evolutionary theory by John Maynard Smith (1972, 1974 ).12

that the "rational principles—whatever that may mean" that "guide" agents
in Game theory is yet one more fundamental contribution to twentieth-
century competition can exert their influence even on such unconscious,
unreflective thinking from John von Neumann.13 Von Neumann created
game theory in semi-agents as viruses, trees, and insects, because the stakes
and payoff collaboration with the economist Oskar Morgenstern, and it

grew out of their possibilities of competition determine which lines of play
cannot help realization that agents make a fundamental difference to the
complexity of winning or losing if adopted, however mindlessly they are
adopted. The best-the world.14 Whereas a lone "Robinson Crusoe" agent
can view all problems known example in game theory is the Prisoner's
Dilemma, a simple two-as seeking stable maxima—hill-climbing on Mount
Fuji, if you like—as soon person "game" which casts shadows, both
obvious and surprising, into many as other (maxima-seeking) agents are
included in the environment, strikingly different circumstances in our
world. Here it is in basic outline (excellent different methods of analysis are
required:

detailed discussions of it are found in Poundstone 1992 and Dawkins
1989a).

You and another person have been imprisoned pending trial (on a trumped-
up A guiding principle cannot be formulated by the requirement of maximiz
charge, let's say), and the prosecutor offers each of you, separately, the same
ing two ( or more) functions at once ___One wouid be mistaken to believe
deal: if you both hang tough, neither confessing nor implicating the other,
you that it can be obviated ... by a mere recourse to the devices of the theory
of will each get a short sentence (the state's evidence is not that strong); if
you probability. Every participant can determine the variables which de-
confess and implicate the other and he hangs tough, you go scot free and he
gets life in prison; if you both confess-and implicate, you both get medium-
length sentences. Of course, if you hang tough and the other person
confesses, he goes free and you get life. What should you do?

12. Maynard Smith built his game-theory applications to evolution on the
foundations already laid by R. A. Fisher ( 1930). One of Maynard Smith's
many more recent contri-If you both could hang tough, defying the
prosecutor, this would be much butions was showing Stuart Kauffman that
he was, after all, a Darwinian, not an anti-better for the two of you than if
you both confess, so couldn't you just Darwinian (see Lewin 1992, pp. 42-
43).

promise each other to hang tough? (In the standard jargon of the Prisoner's
Dilemma, the hang-tough option is called cooperating. ) You could

promise, 13. 1 sometimes wonder if there is any important advance in
thinking in the second half of this century that von Neumann is not the
father of. The computer, the model of self-but you would each then feel the
temptation—whether or not you acted on replication, game theory—and if
that weren't enough, von Neumann also made major it—to defect, since
then you would go scot free, leaving the sucker, sad to contributions to
quantum physics. For what it is worth, however, I suspect that his say, in
deep trouble. Since the game is symmetrical, the other person will be
formulation of the measurement problem in quantum mechanics is his one
bad idea, a just as tempted, of course, to make a sucker of you by defecting.
Can you risk sleight-of-hand endorsement of a fundamentally Cartesian
model of conscious observa-life in prison on the other person's keeping his
promise? Probably safer to tion that has bedeviled quantum mechanics ever
since. My student Turhan Canli first defect, isn't it? That way, you
definitely avoid the worst outcome of all, and opened this door in his
(undergraduate!) term paper for me on the problem of Schrodinger's cat, in
which he developed the sketch of an alternative formulation of quantum
might even go free. Of course, the other fellow will figure this out, too, if
it's physics in which time is quantized. If I ever master the physics (a very
remote prospect, such a bright idea, so he'll probably play it safe and defect,
too, in which case sad to say ), 1 will tackle this hunch, which might extend
in wildly ambitious ways my you must defect to avoid calamity—unless
you are so saintly that you don't theory of consciousness (1991a); more
likely, however, is the prospect that I will be a mind spending your life in
prison to save a promise-breaker!—so you'll both semi-comprehending but
enthusiastic spectator of this development, wherever it leads.

wind up with medium-length sentences. If only you could overcome this 14.
For a fascinating account of the history of game theory and its relation to
nuclear reasoning and cooperate!

disarmament, see William Poundstone's 1992 book, Prisoner's Dilemma
John von Neumann, Game Theory, and the Puzzle of the Bomb.

254 SEARCHING FOR QUALITY

Playing with Constraints 255

The logical structure of the game is what matters, not this particular set-
could avoid the trouble of building those ridiculous and expensive trunks,
ting, which is a usefully vivid imagination-driver. We can replace the prison
stay low and thrifty shrubs, and get just as much sunlight as before! [Den-
sentences with positive outcomes (it's a chance to win different amounts of
nett 1990b, p. 132.]

cash—or, say, descendants ) just so long as the payoffs are symmetrical, and
ordered so that lone defection pays more than mutual cooperation, which
But they can't get together; under these circumstances, defection from any
pays each more than mutual defection does, which in turn pays more than
the cooperative "agreement" is bound to pay off if ever or whenever it
occurs, so sucker payoff one gets when the other is a lone defector. (And in
formal set-trees would be stuck with the "tragedy of the commons" (Hardin
1968) if tings we set a further condition: the average of the sucker and
mutual-there weren't an essentially inexhaustible supply of sunshine. The
tragedy of defection payoffs must not be greater than the mutual-
cooperation payoff.) the commons occurs when there is a finite "public" or
shared resource that Whenever this structure is instantiated in the world,
there is a Prisoner's Di-individuals will be selfishly tempted to take more of
than their fair share—

lemma.

such as the edible fish in the oceans. Unless very specific and enforceable
Game-theoretic explorations have been undertaken in many fields, from
agreements can be reached, the result will tend to be the destruction of the
philosophy and psychology to economics and biology. The most influential
resource. Many species, in many regards, face various sorts of Prisoner's of
the many applications of game-theoretic thinking to evolutionary theory is
Dilemmas. And we human beings face them both consciously and Maynard
Smith's concept of an evolutionarily stable strategy, or ESS, a
unconsciously—sometimes in ways that we might never have imagined
strategy that may not be "best" from any Olympian (or Fujian!) standpoint,
without the aid of adaptationist thinking.

but is unimprovable-upon and unsubvertible under the circumstances. May-
Homo sapiens is not exempt from the sort of genetic conflict David Haig

nard Smith (1988, especially chh. 21 and 22) is an excellent introductory
postulates to explain genomic imprinting; in an important new article
(1993) account of game theory in evolution. The revised edition of Richard
Daw-he analyzes a variety of conflicts that exist between the genes of a
pregnant kins' The Selfish Gene ( 1989a) has a particularly good account of
the de-woman and the genes of her embryo. It is in the embryo's interests,
of course, velopment of ESS thinking in biology during the last decade or
so, when that the mother bearing it stay strong and healthy, for its own
survival large-scale computer simulations of various game-theoretic models
revealed depends on her not only completing her term of pregnancy but
tending for her complications that had been overlooked by the earlier, less
realistic versions.

newborn. However, if the mother, in her attempt to stay healthy under
trying circumstances—famine, for instance, which must have been a
common I now like to express the essential idea of an ESS in the following
more circumstance in most generations of human existence— should cut
down on economical way. An ESS is a strategy that does well against
copies of itself.

the nutrition she provides her embryo, at some point this becomes more of a
The rationale for this is as follows. A successful strategy is one that dom-
threat to the embryo's survival than the alternative, a weakened mother.

inates the population. Therefore it will tend to encounter copies of itself.

If the embryo were "given a choice" between being spontaneously aborted
Therefore it won't stay successful unless it does well against copies of early
in the pregnancy or being stillborn or of low birth weight on the one itself.
This definition is not so mathematically precise as Maynard Smith's, hand,
versus being born at normal weight of a weak or even dying mother on and
it cannot replace his definition because it is actually incomplete. But the
other, what would (selfish) reason dictate? It would dictate taking it does
have the virtue of encapsulating, intuitively, the basic ESS idea.

whatever steps are available to try to ensure that the mother does not cut her

[Dawkins 1989a, p. 282.]

losses (she can always try to have another child later, when the famine is
over), and this is just what the embryo does. Both embryo and mother can
be There can be no doubt that game-theoretic analyses work in evolutionary
entirely oblivious of this conflict—as oblivious as the trees rising theory.
Why, for instance, are the trees in the forest so tall? For the very same
competitively in the forest. The conflict plays out in the genes and their
reason that huge arrays of garish signs compete for our attention along
control of hormones, not in the brains of mother and embryo; it is the same
commercial strips in every region of the country! Each tree is looking out
for sort of conflict we saw between maternal and paternal genes in the
mouse.

itself, and trying to get as much sunlight as possible.

There is a flood of hormones; the embryo produces a hormone that will
enhance its own growth at the expense of the mother's nutritional needs, her
If only those redwoods could get together and agree on some sensible body
responds with an antagonist hormone that attempts to undo the effect of
zoning restrictions and stop competing with each other for sunlight, they the
first; and so on, in an escalation that can produce 256 SEARCHING FOR
QUALITY

Playing with Constraints 257

hormone levels many times higher than normal. This tug-of-war usually
ends take? Isn't this Panglossian optimism? (As we have just seen, this
sometimes in a mutually semi-satisfactory standoff, but it produces a host of
by-products looks more like Panglossian pessimism. "Darn—organisms are
'too smart' to that would be utterly baffling and senseless were they not the
predictable cooperate!"16)

effects of such conflict. Haig concludes with an application of the The
standard assumption of game theory is that there will always be
fundamental game-theoretic insight: "Maternal and fetal genes would both
mutations that have the "right" phenotypic effects to rise to the occasion,
but benefit if a given transfer of resources was achieved with a lesser
production what if the right move just doesn't "occur to Mother Nature"? Is
this ever or of... hormones and less maternal resistance, but such an

agreement is often very likely? We certainly know of cases in which Mother
Nature does evolutionarily unenforceable" (Haig 1993, p. 518).

take the move—to make the forests, for instance. Are there perhaps just as
This is not, in many regards, welcome news. Von Neumann's all-too-casual
many (or more) cases in which some sort of hidden constraint prevents this
remark on the inevitability of human selfishness epitomizes the Darwinian
from happening? There may well be, but in every such case, adaptationists
mind-set that many people view with loathing, and it is not hard to see why.

will want to persist by asking the next question: And is there a reason in
this They fear that Darwinian "survival of the fittest" would entail that
people are case why Mother Nature doesn't take the move, or is it just a
brute, nasty and selfish. Isn't that just what von Neumann is saying? No.
Not quite.

unthinking constraint on Mother Nature's rational gamesmanship?

He is saying that it is indeed entailed by Darwinism that such virtues as
Gould has suggested that a fundamental flaw of adaptationist reasoning is
cooperation should be in general "evolutionarily unenforceable" and hence
the assumption that in every fitness landscape, the way is always shown as
hard to come by. If cooperation and the other unselfish virtues are to exist,
clear to the tops of the various summits, but there might well be hidden they
must be designed—they do not come for free. They can be designed
constraints, rather like railroad tracks lying across the landscape. "The
conunder special circumstances. (See, for instance, Eshel 1984, 1985, and
Haig straints of inherited form and developmental pathways may so channel
any and Grafen 1991) After all, the eukaryotic revolution that made
multicelled change that even though selection induces motion down
permitted paths, the organisms possible was a revolution that began when
an enforceable truce channel itself represents the primary determinant of
evolutionary direction"

was somehow engineered between certain prokaryotic cells and their
(Gould 1982a, p. 383). Populations, then, do not get to spread ad lib across
bacterial invaders. They found a way of joining forces and submerging their
the terrain, but are forced to stay on the tracks, as in figure 9.4.

selfish interests.

Suppose this is true. Now, how do we locate the hidden constraints? It is
Cooperation and the other virtues are, in general, rare and special prop-all
very well for Gould and Lewontin to point to the possibility of hidden erties
that can only emerge under very particular and complex R-and-D cir-
constraints—every adaptationist already acknowledges this as an omnipres-
cumstances. We might contrast the Panglossian Paradigm, then, with the ent
possibility—but we need to consider what methodology might be best for
Pollyannian Paradigm, which cheerfully assumes, with Pollyanna, that
discovering them. Consider a curious variation on a standard practice in
Mother Nature is Nice.15 In general, she isn't—but that isn't the end of the
chess.

world. Even in the present case, we can see that there are other perspectives
When a stronger player plays a weaker opponent in friendly matches, the to
adopt. Aren't we really rather fortunate, for instance, that trees are so in-
stronger player often volunteers to take on a handicap, to make the game
superably selfish? The beautiful forests—to say nothing of the beautiful
more evenly matched and exciting. The standard handicap is to give up a
wooden sailing ships and the clean white paper on which we write our po-
piece or two—to play with only one bishop or one rook, or, in a really etry
—could not exist if trees weren't selfish.

extreme case, to play without a queen. But here is another handicapping
There can be no doubt, as I say, that game-theoretic analyses work in
system that might have interesting results. Before the match, the stronger
evolutionary theory, but do they always work? Under what conditions do
player writes down on a piece of paper a hidden constraint ( or constraints )
they apply, and how can we tell when we are overstepping? Game-theory
calculations always assume that there is a certain range of "possible"
moves, from which the selfish-by-definition contestants make their choices.
But how realistic is this in general! Just because a move in a particular
circumstance is 16. The Panglossian pessimist says, "Isn't it a shame that
this is, after all, the best of all possible worlds!" Imagine a beer
commercial: As the sun sets over the mountains, one of the move that
reason dictates, is it the move nature will always the hunks lounging around

the campfire intones, "It doesn't get any better than this!"—at which point
his beautiful companion bursts into tears: "Oh no! Is that really true?" It
wouldn't sell much beer.

15. For a powerful antidote to the Pollyannian Paradigm, see G. Williams
1988.

258 SEARCHING FOR QUALITY

Playing with Constraints 259

are available to her, and adjust his strategy only when evidence begins to
mount that she is actually bound not to take what otherwise would be the
obviously best move.

Such evidence is not at all easy to gather. If you think your opponent cannot
move her queen diagonally, you might test that hypothesis by the risky
tactic of offering a free capture to that queen on the diagonal. If the queen

declines, that counts in favor of your hypothesis— unless there is a deeper
reason of strategy (unimagined as yet by you) for declining the capture.
(Remember Orgel's Second Rule: Evolution is cleverer than you are.)

Of course, another way of learning the hidden constraints at the chessboard
is to peek at the paper, and one might think that what Gould and Lewontin
are recommending is that adaptationists simply abandon their game-playing
and go for the truth via a more direct examination of the molecular
evidence.

Unfortunately, this analogy is mistaken. You are certainly entitled to use
whatever data-gathering tricks are available in the game of science, but
when you peek at the molecules, all you find there is more machinery, more
design (or apparent design) in need of reverse engineering. Nowhere are
Mother Nature's hidden constraints written down in a way that can be read
without the help of the interpretive rules of artifact hermeneutics (Dennett
1990b).

The descent to the deeper level of the DNA, for instance, is indeed a
valuable way of vastly improving one's investigative acuity—though
usually at the F

intolerable cost of drowning in too much data—but in any case it is not an
IGURE 9.4

alternative to adaptationism; it is an extension of it.

The example of playing chess with hidden constraints lets us see a pro-that
she will undertake to play under, and hides the paper under the board.

found difference between Mother Nature and human chess-players that does
What is the difference between a constraint and a forced move? Reason
have implications, I think, for a widespread foible in adaptationist thinking.
If dictates a forced move—and will always dictate it, again and again—
whereas you were playing chess under hidden constraints, you would adjust
your some frozen bit of history dictates a constraint, whether or not there
was a strategy accordingly. Knowing that you had secretly promised not to

move reason for its birth, and whether or not there is a reason for or against
it now.

your queen diagonally, you would probably forgo any campaign that put
your Here are a few of the possible constraints:

queen at risk of capture thanks to her unusual limitation—although of
course you could take a chance, hoping your weak opponent wouldn't
notice the Unless I am forced by the rules to do so (because I am in check,
and am possibility. But you have knowledge of the hidden constraints, and
foresight.

obliged to play whatever legal move escapes check), Mother Nature does
not. Mother Nature has no reason to avoid high-risk gambits; she takes
them all, and shrugs when most of them lose.

(1)I may never move the same piece on two consecutive turns.

Here is how the idea applies in evolutionary thinking. Suppose we notice
(2)I may not castle.

that a particular butterfly has protective coloration on its wings that uncan-

OceanofPDF.com

(3)I may capture with pawns only three times in the whole game. (4) nily
mimics the pattern of colors on the forest floor where it lives. We chalk My
queen must move only in rook fashion, never diagonally.

that up as a fine adaptation, camouflage, which it undoubtedly is. This
butterfly does better than its cousins because its coloration so perfectly
repro-Now imagine the epistemological predicament of the weaker player,
who duces the coloration of the forest floor. But there is a temptation,
routinely knows his opponent is playing with hidden constraints but doesn't
know what they are. How should he proceed? The answer is quite obvious:
he should play as if all the apparently possible moves—all the legal moves
—

260 SEARCHING FOR QUALITY

Playing with Constraints 261

succumbed to, to add, implicitly or explicitly. "And what's more, if the
forest If hidden constraints guarantee that there is a largely invisible set of
maze floor had any other color pattern on it, the butterfly would look like
that walls—or channels or railroad tracks—in the space of apparent
possibility, pattern instead!" That is uncalled for. It may well not be true. It
could even then "you can't get there from here" is true much more often
than we might be, in the limit, that this is the only sort of forest floor that
this lineage of imagine. Even if this is so, we still can do no better in our
exploration of this butterfly could mimic with much success; if the forest
floor were much possibility than to play out our reverse-engineering
strategies at every op-different, this lineage would just not be here—never
forget about the im-portunity, at every level. It is important not to
overestimate the actual pos-portance in evolution of bait-and-switch. If the
forest floor changes, what will sibilities, but it is even more important not to
underestimate them, an equally happen? Will the butterfly automatically
adapt? All we can say is that either common foible, though not one that
adaptationists typically manifest. Many it will adapt by changing its
camouflage or it won't! If it doesn't, then either it adaptationist arguments
are. of the if-it's-possible-it-will-happen variety: will find some other

adaptation in its limited kit of available moves, or it will cheats will emerge
to invade the saints; or an arms race will ensue until such-soon disappear.

and-such a first-order adaptive stability is achieved, etc. These arguments
pre-The limiting case, in which exactly one path was ever open to explore,
is suppose that enough of the space of possibilities is "habitable" to ensure
that an instance of our old nemesis actualism: only the actual was possible.
Such the process approximates the game-theory model used. But are these
as-straitjacketed explorations of the space of (apparent) possibility are not
ruled sumptions always appropriate? Will these bacteria mutate into a form
that is out, I am saying, but they must be the exception, not the rule. If they
were the resistant to our new vaccine? Not if we're lucky, but we're better
off assuming rule, Darwinism would be defunct, utterly incapable of
explaining any of the the worst—namely, that there are, in the space
actually accessible to these ( apparent) design in the biosphere. It would be
as if you wrote a chess-bacteria, countermoves in the arms race our medical
innovation has set in playing computer program that could just play one
game by rote (say, motion (Williams and Nesse 1991)

Alekhine's moves in the famous Flamberg-Alekhine match in Mannheim in
1914 ) and, mirabile dictu, it regularly won against all competition! This
would be a "pre-established harmony" of miraculous proportions, and
would CHAPTER 9: Adaptationism is both ubiquitous and powerful in
biology. Like make a mockery of the Darwinian claim to have an
explanation of how the any other idea, it can be misused, but it is not a
mistaken idea; it is in fact the

"winning" moves have been found.

irreplaceable core of Darwinian thinking. Gould and Lewontin's fabled But
our dismissal of actualism should not tempt us to err in the other refutation
of adaptationism is an illusion, but they have raised everybody's direction,
supposing that the space of real possibilities is much more densely
consciousness about the risks of incautious thinking. Good adaptationistic
populated than it actually is. The temptation, when we think about pheno-
thinking is always on the lookout for hidden constraints, and in fact is the
typic variation, is to adopt a sort of Identikit tactic of assuming that all the
best method for uncovering them.

minor variations we can imagine on the themes we find in actuality are truly
available. Carried to extremes, this tactic will always vastly—Vastly—over-
CHAPTER 10: The view of Darwinian thinking presented so far in this
book estimate what is actually possible. If the actual Tree of Life occupies
Van-has been challenged, repeatedly, by Stephen Jay Gould, whose
influential ishingly narrow threads through the Library of Mendel, the
actually possible writings have contributed to a seriously distorted picture
of evolutionary Tree of Life is itself some rather bushier but still far from
dense partial filling biology among both lay people and philosophers and
scientists in other of the apparently possible. We have already seen that the
Vast space of all fields. Gould has announced several different
"revolutionary" abridgments of imaginable phenotypes—Identikit Space,
we might call it—no doubt includes orthodox Darwinism, but they all turn
out to be false alarms. There is a huge regions for which there are no
recipes in the Library of Mendel. But pattern to be discerned in these
campaigns: Gould, like eminent evolutionary even along the paths through
which the Tree of Life wanders, we are not thinkers before him, has been
searching for skyhooks to limit the power of guaranteed that the neighboring
regions of Identikit Space are actually all Darwin's dangerous idea.

accessible.17

17. Gould is fond of pointing out the mistake of looking back in time and
seeing "lin-continuous) bushes of unactualized possibility where in fact
there may be rather sparse eages" where we should be seeing "bushes"—
including all the failures that have left no twigs creating paths to relatively
isolated outposts in the huge space of apparent descendants. 1 am pointing
out a contrary sort of mistake: imagining dense (or even possibilities.

The Boy Who Cried Wolf? 263

has proven to be more than a mild corrective to orthodoxy at best, their
rhetorical impact on the outside world has been immense and distorting.
This presents me with a problem that I cannot ignore or postpone. In my
own CHAPTER TEN

work over the years, I have often appealed to evolutionary considerations,
and have almost as often run into a curious current of resistance: my

appeals to Darwinian reasoning have been bluntly rejected as discredited,
out-of-date Bully for Brontosaurus

science by philosophers, psychologists, linguists, anthropologists, and
others who have blithely informed me that I have got my biology all wrong
—I haven't been doing my homework, because Steve Gould has shown that
Darwinism isn't in such good shape after all. Indeed, it is close to
extinction.

That is a myth, but a very influential myth, even in the halls of science. I
have tried in this book to present an accurate account of evolutionary
thinking, deflecting the reader from common misunderstandings, and
defending the theory against ill-grounded objections. I have had a lot of
expert 1. THE BOY WHO CRIED WOLF?

help and advice, and so I am confident that I have succeeded. But the view
of Darwinian thinking I have presented is quite at odds with the view made
Scientists have power by virtue of the respect commanded by the familiar to
many by Gould. Surely, then, my view must be mistaken? After all,
discipline. We may therefore be sorely tempted to misuse that power in who
knows better about Darwin and Darwinism than Gould?

furthering a personal prejudice or social goal— why not provide that
Americans are notoriously ill-informed about evolution. A recent Gallup
extra oomph by extending the umbrella of science over a personal poll
(June 1993 ) discovered that 47 percent of adult Americans believe that
preference in ethics or politics? But we cannot, lest we lose the very Homo
sapiens is a species created by God less than ten thousand years ago.

respect that tempted us in the first place.

But insofar as they know anything at all about the subject, it is probably due

—STEPHEN JAY GOULD 1991b, pp. 429-30

more to Gould than to anyone else. In the battle over the teaching of
"creation science'' in the schools, he has been a key witness for the defense
of evolution Many years ago, I saw a program on British television in

which young chil-in the court cases that continue to plague American
education. For twenty dren were interviewed about Queen Elizabeth II.
Their confident answers years, his monthly column, "This View of Life," in
Natural History, has were charming: the Queen, it seems, spends a large
part of the day vacuum-provided professional and amateur biologists with a
steady stream of cleaning Buckingham Palace—while wearing her crown,
of course. She pulls arresting insights, fascinating facts, and well-needed
correctives to their the throne up to the telly when she is not occupied with
affairs of state, and thinking. In addition to his collections of these essays,
in such volumes as wears an apron over her ermine robes when she does the
washing up. I re-Ever Since Darwin (1977a), The Panda's Thumb ( 1980a),
Hen's Teeth and alized then that the largely imaginary Queen Elizabeth II of
these young Horse's Toes ( 1983b), The Flamingo's Smile (1985 ), Bully for
Brontosaurus children (what philosophers would call their intentional
object) was in some ( 1991b), and Eight Little Piggies ( 1993d), and his
technical publications on regards a more potent and interesting object in the
world than the actual snails and paleontology, he has written a major
theoretical book, Ontogeny woman. Intentional objects are the creatures of
beliefs, and hence they play a and Phytogeny ( 1977b); an attack on IQ
testing, The Mis-measure of Man (

more direct role in guiding (or misguiding) people's behavior than do the
real 1981); a book on the reinterpretation of the fauna of the Burgess Shale,
objects they purport to be identical to. The gold in Fort Knox, for example,
is Wonderful Life (1989a); and numerous other articles on topics ranging
from less important than what is believed about it, and the Albert Einstein
of myth Bach to baseball, from the nature of time to the compromises of
Jurassic is, like Santa Claus, much better known than the relatively dimly
remembered Park. Most of this is simply wonderful: astonishingly erudite,
the very model historical fellow who was the primary source for the myth.

of a scientist who recognizes, as my high-school physics teacher once said,
This chapter is about another myth—Stephen Jay Gould, Refuter of Or-that
science, done right, is one of the humanities.

thodox Darwinism. Over the years, Gould has mounted a series of attacks
on The title of Gould's monthly column comes from Darwin, the closing

aspects of contemporary neo-Darwinism, and although none of these
attacks sentence of Origin of Species.

264 BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS

The Boy Who Cried Wolf? 265

There is grandeur in this view of life, with its several powers, having been
trying, defying the moral of Aesop's fable about the boy who cried wolf.
This originally breathed into a few forms or into one; and that, whilst this
planet has earned him not just a credibility problem (among scientists), but
also the has gone cycling on according to the fixed laws of gravity, from so
simple animosity of some of his colleagues, who have felt the sting of what
they a beginning endless forms most beautiful and most wonderful have
been, consider to be undeserved public condemnation in the face of his
influential and are being, evolved.

campaigns. As Robert Wright (1990, p. 30) puts it, Gould is "America's
evolutionist laureate. If he has been systematically misleading Americans
Anybody as prolific and energetic as Gould would surely have an agenda
about what evolution is and what it means, that amounts to a lot of intel-
beyond that of simply educating and delighting his fellow human beings
lectual damage."

about the Darwinian view of life. In fact, he has had numerous agendas. He
Has he done this? Consider the following. If you believe: has fought hard
against prejudice, and particularly against the abuse of scientific research (
and scientific prestige ) by those who would clothe their (1) that
adaptationism has been refuted or relegated to a minor role in political
ideologies in the potent mantle of scientific respectability. It is evolutionary
biology, or

important to recognize that Darwinism has always had an unfortunate
power (2) that since adaptationism is "the central intellectual flaw of
sociobi-to attract the most unwelcome enthusiasts—demagogues and
psychopaths ology" ( Gould 1993a, p. 319 ), sociobiology has been utterly
discred-and misanthropes and other abusers of Darwin's dangerous idea.
Gould has ited as a scientific discipline, or

laid this sad story bare in dozens of tales, about the Social Darwinists, about
( 3) that Gould and Eldredge's hypothesis of punctuated equilibrium over-
unspeakable racists, and most poignantly about basically good people who
threw orthodox neo-Darwinism, or

got confused—seduced and abandoned, you might say—by one Darwinian
(4) that Gould has shown that the fact of mass extinction refutes the siren or
another. It is all too easy to run off half cocked with some poorly

"extrapolationism" that is the Achilles' heel of orthodox neo-understood
version of Darwinian thinking, and Gould has made it a major Darwinism,

part of his life's work to protect his hero from this sort of abuse.

The irony is that his own strenuous efforts to protect Darwinism have then
what you believe is a falsehood. If you believe any of these propositions,
sometimes backfired. Gould has been a defender of his own brand of Dar-
you are, however, in very good company—both numerous and intellectually
winism, but an ardent opponent of what he has called "ultra-Darwinism" or
distinguished company. Quine once said of a misguided critic of his work,

"hyper-Darwinism." What is the difference? The uncompromising "no-

"He reads with a broad brush." We are all apt to do this, especially when we
skyhooks-allowed" Darwinism I have presented is, by Gould's lights, hyper-
try to construe in simple terms the take-home message of work outside our
Darwinism, an extremist view that needs overthrowing. Since in fact it is, as
I own field. We tend to read, with bold brushstrokes, what we want to find.

have said, quite orthodox neo-Darwinism, Gould's campaigns have had to
Each of these four propositions expresses a verdict that is rather more take
the form of calls for revolution. Time and again, Gould has announced
decisive and radical than Gould may have intended, but together they from
his bully-pulpit to a fascinated world of onlookers that neo-Darwinism
compose a message that is out there, in many quarters. I beg to differ, so it
is dead, supplanted by a revolutionary new vision—still Darwinian, but
falls to me to dismantle the myth. Not an easy job, since I must
painstakingly overthrowing the establishment view. It hasn't happened. As

Simon Conway separate the rhetoric from the reality, all the while fending
off—by Morris, one of the heroes of Gould's Wonderful Life, has said, "His
views explaining away—the entirely reasonable presumption that an
evolutionist of have done much to stir the established orthodoxies, even if,
when the dust Gould's stature couldn't be that wrong in his verdicts, could
he? Yes and no.

settles, the edifice of evolutionary theory still looks little changed" (
Conway The real Gould has made major contributions to evolutionary
thinking, Morris 1991, p. 6).

correcting a variety of serious and widespread misapprehensions, but the
Gould is not the only evolutionist to succumb to the urge of overdrama-
mythical Gould has been created out of the yearnings of many Darwin-
tization. Manfred Eigen and Stuart Kauffman—and there are others we
dreaders, feeding on Gould's highly charged words, and this has
encouraged, haven't considered—have also styled themselves at first as
radical heretics.

in turn, his own aspirations to bring down "ultra-Darwinism," leading him
Who wouldn't prefer one's contributions to be truly revolutionary? But into
some misbegotten claims.

whereas Eigen and Kauffman, as we have seen, have moderated their
rhetoric If Gould has kept crying wolf, why has he done this? The
hypothesis I shall in due course, Gould has gone from revolution to
revolution. So far, his defend is that Gould is following in a long tradition
of eminent thinkers who declarations of revolution have all been false
alarms, but he has kept on have been seeking skyhooks—and coming up
with cranes. Since evolution-266 BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS

The Spandrel's Thumb 267

ary theory has made great progress in recent years, the task of making room
dead? There is no more committed or brilliant adaptationist than John for a
skyhook has become more difficult, raising the bar for any thinker who
Maynard Smith, but here I think we see the master napping: he doesn't ask
wants to find some blessed exemption. By following the repetition of theme

himself this "why" question. After I began to notice that many of the most
and variation in Gould's work, I will uncover a pattern: each failed attempt
important contributions to evolutionary theory have been made by thinkers
defines a small portion of the shadow of his quarry, until eventually the who
were fundamentally ill-at-ease with Darwin's great insight, I could begin
source of Gould's driving discomfort will be clearly outlined. Gould's ulti-to
take seriously the hypothesis that Gould himself is one of these. Making
mate target is Darwin's dangerous idea itself; he is opposed to the very idea
the case for this hypothesis will take patience and hard work, but there's no
that evolution is, in the end, just an algorithmic process.

avoiding it. The mythology about what Gould has shown and hasn't shown
is It would be interesting to ask the further question of why Gould is so set
so widespread that it will befog all the other issues before us if I don't do
against this idea, but that is really a task for another occasion, and perhaps
for what I can to disperse it first.

another writer. Gould himself has shown how to execute such a task. He has
examined the underlying assumptions, fears, and hopes of earlier scientists,
from Darwin himself through Alfred Binet, the inventor of IQ testing, to 2.
THE SPANDREL'S THUMB

Charles Walcott, the (mis)classifier of the Burgess Shale fauna, to name just
three of his best-known case histories. What hidden agendas— moral,
political, religious—have driven Gould himself? Fascinating though this I
think I can see what is breaking down in evolutionary theory— the question
is, I am going to resist the temptation to try to answer it, though in strict
construction of the modern synthesis with its belief in pervasive due course
I will briefly consider, as I must, the rival hypotheses that have adaptation,
gradualism and extrapolation by smooth continuity from been suggested. I
have enough to do just defending the admittedly startling causes of change
in local populations to major trends and transitions in claim that the pattern
in Gould's failed revolutions reveals that America's the history of life.

evolutionist laureate has always been uncomfortable with the fundamental

—STEPHEN JAY GOULD 1980b

core of Darwinism.

For years I was genuinely baffled by the ill-defined hostility to Darwinism
At issue is not the general idea that natural selection can act as a that I
encountered among many of my fellow academics, and although they
creative force; the basic argument, in principle, is sound. Primary doubt
cited Gould as their authority, I figured they were just wishfully misreading
centers on the subsidiary claims— gradualism and the adaptationist him,
with a little help from the mass media, always eager to obliterate program.

subtlety and fan the flames of every minor controversy. It really didn't occur

—STEPHEN JAY GOULD 1982a

to me that Gould was often fighting on the other side. He himself has been
victimized so often by this hostility. Maynard Smith mentions just one ex-
Gould has done much to bring a central theme of Darwinism, that ample:

supposed perfection in design is a jury-rigged compromise adopting some
improbable pieces of anatomy, to general notice. But some of these One
cannot spend a lifetime working on evolutionary theory without be-essays
contain hints that somehow the Darwinian explanation is only coming
aware that most people who do not work in the field, and some partly
correct. But is this a serious attack? Not on a closer reading.

who do, have a strong wish to believe that the Darwinian theory is false.

—SIMON CONWAY MORSJS 1991

This was most recently brought home to me when my friend Stephen
Gould, who is as convinced a Darwinist as I am, found himself the occasion
Gould (1980b, 1982a) sees two main problem elements in the modern
synthesis: of an editorial in the Guardian announcing the death of
Darwinism, fol-

"pervasive adaptation" and "gradualism." And he sees them as related.
How? He has lowed by an extensive correspondence on the same theme,
merely be-given somewhat different answers over the years. We can begin

with "pervasive cause he had pointed out some difficulties the theory still
faces. [Maynard adaptation." To see what the issue is, we should return to
the Gould and Lewontin Smith 1981, p. 221, as reprinted in Maynard Smith
1988.]

paper of 1979. The title is a good place to start: "The Spandrels of San
Marco and the Panglossian Paradigm: A Critique of the Adaptationist
Programme." In addition to Why should such a "convinced Darwinist" as
Gould keep getting himself their redefining of "Panglossian," they
introduced another term, "spandrel," which has in trouble by contributing to
the public misconception that Darwinism is proven

268 BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS

The Spandrel's Thumb 269

to be a highly successful coinage in one sense: it has spread through
evolutionary biology and beyond. In a recent retrospective essay, Gould put
it this way:

Ten years later, my friend Dave Raup ... said to me, "We have all been
spandrelized." When your example becomes both generic and a different
part of speech, you have won. Call those San Marco spandrels "Kleenex,"

"Jell-O," and a most emphatically non-metaphorical "Band-Aid." [Gould
1993a, p. 325.]

Ever since Gould and Lewontin, evolutionists (and many others) have
spoken of spandrels, thinking that they knew what they were talking about.

What are spandrels? A good question. Gould wants to convince us that
adaptation is not "pervasive," so he needs to have a term for the
(presumably many) biological features that are not adaptations. They are to
be called

"spandrels." Spandrels are, um, things that aren't adaptations, whatever they
are. Gould and Lewontin have shown us, haven't they, that spandrels are
ubiquitous in the biosphere? Not so. Once we clear away the confusions
about what the term might mean, we will see that either spandrels are not
ubiquitous after all, or they are the normal basis for adaptations, and hence
no abridgment at all of "pervasive adaptation."

Gould and Lewontin's paper begins with two famous architectural
examples, and since a crucial misstep is made at the outset, we must look
closely at the text. ( One of the effects of classic texts is that people
misremember them, having read them hurriedly once. Even if you are
familiar with this oft-

© Alinari/Art Resources, N.Y.

reprinted beginning, I urge you to read it again, slowly, to see how the
FIGURE 10.1. One of the spandrels

misstep happens, right before your eyes.)

of San Marco.

The great dome of St Mark's Cathedral in Venice presents in its mosaic mid-
line of the vault, where the sides of the fans intersect between the design a
detailed iconography expressing the mainstays of Christian faith.

pillars (figure (10.]2). Since the spaces must exist, they are often used for
Three circles of figures radiate out from a central image of Christ: angels,
ingenious ornamental effect. In King's College Chapel in Cambridge, for
disciples, and virtues. Each circle is divided into quadrants, even though
example, the spaces contain bosses alternately embellished with the Tudor
the dome itself is radially symmetrical in structure. Each quadrant meets
rose and portcullis. In a sense, this design represents an 'adaptation', but one
of the four spandrels in the arches below the dome. Spandrels—the the
architectural constraint is clearly primary. The spaces arise as a nec-tapering
triangular spaces formed by the intersection of two rounded essary by-
product of fan vaulting; their appropriate use is a secondary arches at right
angle (figure [10.]1)—are necessary architectural by-effect. Anyone who
tried to argue that the structure exists because the products of mounting a
dome on rounded arches. Each spandrel contains alternation of rose and
portcullis makes so much sense in a Tudor chapel a design admirably fitted
into its tapering space __ The design is so elab would be inviting the same
ridicule that Voltaire heaped on Dr Pangloss....

orate, harmonious and purposeful that we are tempted to view it as the Yet
evolutionary biologists, in their tendency to focus exclusively on im-
starting point of any analysis, as the cause in some sense of the surrounding
mediate adaptation to local conditions, do tend to ignore architectural
architecture. But this would invert the proper path of analysis. The system
constraints and perform just such an inversion of explanation. [Gould
begins with an architectural constraint: the necessary four spandrels and
1993a, pp. 147-49.]

their tapering triangular form. They provide a space in which the mosa-
icists worked; they set the quadripartite symmetry of the dome above....

First, we should notice that from the outset Gould and Lewontin invite us
Every fan vaulted ceiling must have a series of open spaces along the to
contrast adaptationism with a concern for architectural "necessity" or

270 BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS

The Spandrel's Thumb 271

should expand our reverse-engineering perspective back onto the processes
of R and D, and embryological development, instead of focusing
"exclusively on immediate adaptation to local conditions." That, after all, is
one of the main lessons of the last two chapters, and Gould and Lewontin
could share the credit for drawing it to the attention of evolutionists. But
almost everything else that Gould and Lewontin have said militates against
this interpretation; they mean to oppose adaptationism, not enlarge it. They
call for a "pluralism" in evolutionary biology of which adaptationism is to
be just one element, its influence diminished by the other elements, if not
utterly suppressed.

The spandrels of San Marco, we are told, "are necessary architectural
byproducts of mounting a dome on rounded arches." In what sense
necessary?

The standard assumption among biologists I have asked is that this is
somehow a geometric necessity, and hence has nothing whatever to do with
adaptationist cost-benefit calculations, since there is simply no choice to be

made! As Gould and Lewontin (p. 161) put it, "Spandrels must exist once a
blueprint specifies that a dome shall rest on rounded arches." But is that
true?

It might appear at first as if there were no alternatives to smooth, tapering
triangular surfaces in between the dome and the four rounded arches, but
there are in fact indefinitely many ways that those spaces could be filled
with masonry, all of them about equal in structural soundness and ease of
building. Here is the San Marco scheme (on the left) and two variations.
The variations are both, in a word, ugly (I deliberately made them so), but
that does not make them impossible.

Here there is a terminological confusion that seriously impedes discus-
FIGURE 10.2. The ceiling of King's

College Chapel.

"constraint"—as if the discovery of such constraints weren't an integral part
of (good) adaptationist reasoning, as I have argued in the last two chapters.

Now, perhaps we should stop right here and consider the possibility that
Gould and Lewontin have been massively misunderstood, thanks to the
misfiring rhetoric of this opening passage, rhetoric which they even correct
somewhat, in the last sentence quoted above. Perhaps what Gould and
Lewontin showed, in 1979, is that we must all be better adaptationists; we
FlGURE 10.3

272 BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS

The Spandrel's Thumb 273

sion. Does figure 10.3 display three different sorts of spandrels, or does it
display a spandrel on the left, and two ugly alternatives to spandrels? Like

other specialists, art historians often indulge in both strict and loose usages
for their terms. Strictly speaking, the tapering, roughly spherical surface
illustrated in figure 10.1, the sort of surface illustrated on the left in figure
10.3, is called a pendentive, not a spandrel. Strictly speaking, spandrels are
what remains of a wall once you punch an arch through it, as in figure 10.4.

(But even that definition leaves room for confusion. In figure 10.4, are we
shown spandrels on the left, and something else on the right, or do "pierced
spandrels" count as spandrels, strictly speaking? I don't know.) Speaking
more loosely, spandrels are places-to-be-dealt-with, and in that looser sense,
the three variations in figure 10.3 all count as spandrel varieties.

Another variety of spandrel (in that sense ) would be a squinch, shown in
figure 10.5.

But sometimes art historians speak of spandrels when they are talking
specifically about pendentives, the variety shown on the left in figure 10.3.
In Squinch. A corbelling, usually a small arch or half-comical niche, which
is placed that sense, squinches are not types of spandrels, but rivals to
spandrels.

across the corners of a square bay in order to form an octagon suitable for
carrying Now, why does all this matter? Because, when Gould and
Lewontin say an octagonal cloister-vault or a dome. [Krautheimer 1981.]

F

that spandrels are "necessary architectural by-products," what they say is
IGURE 10.5

false, if they are using "spandrel" in the narrow sense (synonymous with
place a dome over four arches, you have what you might call an obligatory

"pendentive") and true only if we understand the term in the loose, all-
inclusive sense. But in that sense of the term, spandrels are design
problems, design opportunity-, you have to put something there to hold up
the dome—

not features that might either be designed (adaptations) or not. Spandrels in
some shape or other, you decide which. But if we interpret spandrels as the
loose sense are indeed "geometrically necessary" in one regard: if you
obligatory places for one adaptation or another, they are hardly a challenge
to adaptationism.

But is there nevertheless some other way in which spandrels in the narrow
sense—pendentives—truly are nonoptional features of San Marco? That is
what Gould and Lewontin seem to be asserting, but if so, they are wrong.
Not only were the pendentives just one among many imaginable options;
they were just one among the readily available options. Squinches had been
a well-known solution to the problem of a dome over arches in Byzantine
architecture since about the seventh century.'

What the actual design of the San Marco spandrels—that is, pendentives—

has going for it are mainly two things. First, it is (approximately) the

"minimal-energy" surface (what you would get if you stretched a soap film
in a wire model of the corner), and hence it is close to the minimal surface
area (and hence might well be viewed as the optimal solution if, say, the
number of costly mosaic tiles was to be minimized!). Second, this smooth
surface is ideal for the mounting of mosaic images—and that is why the 1.
"Whatever the origin of the dome on squinches, however, the importance of
the FIGURE 10.4

question, it seems to me, has been vastly overplayed. Squinches are an
element of construction which can be incorporated into almost any kind of
architecture." (Krautheimer 1981, p. 359.)

274 BULLY FOR BRONTOSAORUS

The Spandrel's Thumb 275

Basilica of San Marco was built: to provide a showcase for mosaic images.

after all.2 That is curious, you may think, but not theoretically important,
The conclusion is inescapable: the spandrels of San Marco aren't spandrels

because, as Gould himself has often reminded us, one of Darwin's funda-
even in Gould's extended sense. They are adaptations, chosen from a set of
mental messages is that artifacts get recycled with new functions—"ex-
equipossible alternatives for largely aesthetic reasons. They were designed
to apted," to use Gould and Vrba's coinage (1981). The panda's thumb is not
have the shape they have precisely in order to provide suitable surfaces for
really a thumb, but it is pretty good at doing what it does. Isn't the Gould-
the display of Christian iconography.

Lewontin concept of a spandrel a valuable tool in evolutionary thinking
even After all, San Marco is not a granary; it is a church (but not a
cathedral).

if its birth was, to exapt yet another famous phrase, a frozen accident of The
primary function of its domes and vaults was never to keep out the rain—

history? Well, what is the function of the term "spandrel" in evolutionary
there were less expensive ways of doing that in the eleventh century, when
thinking? So far as I know, Gould has never given the term (in application
to these domes were built—but to provide a showcase for symbols of the
creed.

biology) an official definition, and since the examples he has relied on to
An earlier church on the site had burned and been rebuilt in 976, but exhibit
his intended meaning are at best misleading, we are left to our own
subsequently the Byzantine style of mosaic decoration had provoked the
devices: we should try to find the best, most charitable, interpretation of his
admiration of powerful Venetians who wanted to create a local example.
Otto texts. When we turn to that task, one point emerges from context with
clarity: Demus (1984), the great authority on the San Marco mosaics, shows
in four whatever a spandrel is, it is supposed to be a non-adaptation.

magnificent volumes that the mosaics are the raison d'etre of San Marco,
and What would be a good architectural example of a spandrel (sensu
Gould)?

hence of many of its architectural details. In other words, there wouldn't be
If adaptations are examples of (good, cunning) design, then perhaps a any

such pendentives in Venice if the "environmental problem" of how to
spandrel is a "no-brainer"—a feature exhibiting no design cunning at all.
The display Byzantine mosaic images of Christian iconography had not
been existence of a doorway—just a rough opening—in a building might
seem to posed and this solution found. If you look closely at the
pendentives (this is be an example, since we would not be particularly
impressed by the wisdom detectable in figure 10.1, but unmistakable if you
look at the actual of the builder who included such a feature in his house.
But there is, after all, pendentives, as I did on a recent visit to Venice ), you
will see that care has a very good reason why dwellings should have
doorways. If spandrels are been taken to round off the transition between
the pendentive proper and the just dead-obvious good solutions to design
problems that tend therefore to arches it connects, the better to provide a
continuous surface for the become part of a relatively unthinking tradition
of building, then spandrels application of mosaics.

abound. In that case, however, they would not be alternatives to adaptation,
Gould and Lewontin's other example from architecture was also ill-chosen,
as but examples par excellence of adaptation—either forced moves or, in
any it turns out, since we simply don't know whether the King's College
bosses event, moves you'd be foolish not to consider. A better sort of
example, then, alternating rose and portcullis are the raison d'etre of the fan
vaulting or vice might be what engineers sometimes call a "don't-care":
something that has to be one way or another, but that nothing makes better
one way than another. If versa. We do know that fan vaulting was not part
of the original design of that we put a door in the doorway, the

chapel, but a later revision, a change order introduced years after the
construction had begun, for reasons unknown ( Fitchen 1961, p. 248). The
very heavy (and heavily carved) keystones at the intersections of the ribs of
2. I am not the first, I have recently discovered, to note these minor errors in
Gould's earlier Gothic vaults had been a sort of forced move for builders, as
I noted in excursion in art history. Some years ago, two evolutionary
biologists were there before chapter 8, since they needed the extra weight of
this keystone to counteract me: Alasdair Houston (1990) drew attention to
the point about spandrels, pendentives, the rising tendency of the pointed
arches, especially during the construction and squinches, and Tim Clutton-

Brock, in a lecture at Harvard, questioned Gould's in-phase, when
deformation of partially completed structures was a major terpretation of
the fan vaulting of King's College Chapel.

problem to be solved. But in late fan vaulting of the King's College type,
the It is interesting that these points were overlooked by all the
deconstructionists and rhetoricians who contributed essays to a recent book
(Selzer 1993) devoted in its purpose of the bosses is probably entirely to
provide focal points for entirety to an analysis of the rhetoric of Gould and
Lewontin's essay. You might suppose ornament. Did the bosses have to be
there anyway? No. From an engineering that someone among this group of
sixteen humanists would have noticed the factual point of view, there could
have been neat round holes there, "lanterns" letting problems in the
fundamental rhetorical device of the essay, but it must be remembered in
daylight from above if it weren't for the roof. Maybe fan vaulting was that
these sophisticates are interested in "deconstructing knowledge"—which
means that they have transcended the stodgy, old-fashioned dichotomy
between fact and fiction, and chosen by the builders so that the ceiling
could carry the Tudor symbols! So hence are not professionally curious
about whether what they read is the truth!

the fabled spandrels of San Marco are not spandrels but adaptations The
Spandrel's numb 111

276 BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS

Sometimes, however, it does seem that he thinks this is the view to attack.

door will need hinges, but should they go on the left or the right? Perhaps
nobody cares, so a coin is flipped, and hinges on the left get installed. If
other He characterizes adaptationism as "pure adaptationism" and
"panadapta-builders copy the result unthinkingly, establishing a local
tradition (reinforced tionism"—apparently the view that every feature of
every organism is to be by the latchmakers, who make latches for left-
hinged doors only), this might explained as an adaptation selected for. In
her recent book, The Ant and the be a spandrel masquerading as an
adaptation. "Why are all the doors in this Peacock, the philosopher of
biology Helena Cronin is particularly acute in village hinged on the left?"

would be a classic adaptationist question, to diagnosing this view (Cronin,
pp. 66-110). She catches Gould in the act of which the answer would be:
"No reason. Just historical accident." So is that a sliding into exactly this
misconstrual;

good architectural example of a spandrel? Perhaps, but, as the example of
the autumn leaves in the preceding chapter showed, it is never a mistake to
ask Stephen Gould talks about 'what may be the most fundamental question
the adaptationist's "why" question, even when the true answer is that there
is in evolutionary theory' and then, significantly, spells out not one question
no reason. Are there many features in the biosphere that exist for no reason?

but two: 'How exclusive is natural selection as an agent of evolutionary It all
depends on what counts as a feature. Trivially, there are indefinitely
change? Must all features of organisms be viewed as adaptations?' (Gould
many properties (e.g., the elephant's property of having more legs than eyes,
1980[a], p. 49; my emphasis). But natural selection could be the only true
the daisy's property of buoyancy ) that are not themselves adaptations, but
no begetter of adaptations without having begot all characteristics; one can
adaptationist would deny this. Presumably, there is a more interesting hold
that all adaptive characteristics are the result of natural selection doctrine
that Gould and Lewontin are urging us to abandon.

without holding that all characteristics are, indeed, adaptive. [Cronin 1991,
What is the doctrine of "pervasive adaptation," then, that Gould supposes p.
86.]

such an admission of widespread spandrels would overthrow? Let us
consider the most extreme form of Panglossian adaptationism imaginable—
the view Natural selection could still be the "exclusive agent" of
evolutionary that every designed thing is optimally designed. A sidelong
glance at human change even though many features of organisms were not
adaptations. Ad-engineering will show that even this view not only permits
but requires the aptationists are—and should be— always on the lookout for
adaptive ex-existence of plenty of undesigned stuff. Imagine, if you can,
some masterpiece planations of whatever feature captures their attention,
but this strategy falls of human engineering—the perfectly designed widget-
factory, energy-short of committing anybody to the caricature that Gould

calls "panadap-efficient, maximally productive, minimally expensive to
operate, maximally tationism."

humane to its workers, simply unimprovable in any dimension. The waste-
Perhaps what Gould opposes will become clearer if we look at what he
paper collection system, for instance, makes recycling by type of
wastepaper recommends in its place. What alternatives to adaptationism did
Gould and maximally convenient and agreeable to the staff, at minimal
energy costs, and Lewontin suggest, as components of their recommended
pluralism? Chief so forth. A Panglossian triumph, it seems. But wait—what
is the wastepaper among them was the idea of a Bauplan, a German
architectural term that had for? It's not for anything. It's a by-product of the
other processes, and the been adopted by certain continental biologists. The
term would usually be wastepaper collection system is for dealing with it.
You can't give an adap-translated in English as "ground plan" or "floor
plan"—the basic outline of the tationist explanation of why the
disposal/recycling system is optimal without structure as seen from above.
It is curious that an architectural term should be presupposing that the
wastepaper itself is just... waste! Of course, you can go highlighted in a
counteradaptationist campaign, but it makes a certain daft on and ask
whether the clerical operations could be made "paperless" by sense when
you see how the original Bauplan theorists pushed it. Adaptation, better use
of computers, but if that happens not to be the case for one reason they said,
could explain superficial modifications of the design of organisms or
another, there will still be wastepaper to deal with, and other wastes and to
fit the environment, but not the fundamental features of living things: "The
by-products as well in any case, so there will always be plenty of
undesigned important steps in evolution, the construction of the Bauplan
itself and the features in a system that is maximally well designed. No
adaptationist could transition between Baupldne, must involve some other
unknown, and perhaps be such a "pervasive" adaptationist as to deny it. The
thesis that every prop-

'internal' mechanism" (Gould and Lewontin 1979, p. 159). The floor plan is
erty of every feature of everything in the living world is an adaptation is not
a not designed by evolution, but just somehow given? Sounds a bit fishy,
thesis anybody has ever taken seriously, or implied by what anybody has

doesn't it? Were Gould and Lewontin buying this radical idea from the
taken seriously, so far as I know. If I am wrong, there are some serious
loonies continent? Not for a moment. They quickly (p. 159) granted that
English out there, but Gould has never shown us one.

biologists had been right "in rejecting this strong form as close to an appeal
to mysticism."

278 BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS

The Spandrel's Thumb 279

But once the mystical version of Baupläne is shunned, what is left? Our
Moreover, Gould, in spite of the appeal to pluralism in the co-authored old
friend: the claim that good reverse engineering takes the building process
paper, has persisted in describing it as laying waste to adaptationism (e.g.,
into account. As Gould and Lewontin put it (p. 160), their view of matters
1993a), and has held out for a "non-Darwinian" interpretation of its central

"does not deny that change, when it occurs, may be mediated by natural
concept, spandrels. It may have occurred to you that I have overlooked an
selection, but it holds that constraints restrict possible paths and modes of
obvious interpretation of spandrels: perhaps spandrels are just QWERTY

change so strongly that the constraints themselves become much the most
phenomena. QWERTY phenomena, you recall, are constraints, but con-
interesting aspect of evolution." Whether or not they are the most
interesting straints with an adaptive history and hence an adaptationist
explanation.3

aspect, they are certainly important, as we have seen. Perhaps adaptationists
Gould himself briefly considered this alternative (1982a, p. 383): "If the
(like art historians) need to have this point repeatedly drawn to their
attention.

channels [that constrain current options] are set by past adaptations, then
When Dawkins, an arch-adaptationist if there ever was one, says, "There
are selection remains preeminent, for all major structures are either

expressions some shapes that certain kinds of embryology seem incapable
of growing"

of immediate selection, or channeled by a phylogenetic heritage of previous
(Dawkins 1989b, p. 216), he is expressing a version of this point about the
selection." Nicely put, but he promptly rejected it, calling it Darwinian
constraint of the Bauplan, and it was something of a revelation to him, he
(which it certainly is), and recommending an alternative "non-Darwinian
says. It was forcefully brought home to him by his own computer
simulations version" which he described as "not widely appreciated but
potentially of evolution, not by the Gould and Lewontin paper, but we
might let them fundamental." Spandrels, he then suggested (p. 383), aren't
the frozen chime in: "We told you so!"

constraints created by earlier adaptations; they are exaptations. What
contrast Gould and Lewontin also discuss other alternatives to adaptation,
and was he trying to draw?

these, too, are themes we have already encountered in orthodox Darwinism:
I think he saw the difference between the exploitation of something random
fixation of genes (the role of historical accident and its ampli-previously
designed, and the exploitation of something originally unde-fication),
developmental constraints due to the way genes get expressed, and signed,
and was claiming that it was an important difference. Perhaps. Here the
problems of getting around in a fitness landscape with "multiple adaptive is
some indirect textual evidence for that reading. A recent article in the
peaks." These are all real phenomena; as usual, the debate among Boston
Globe quotes the linguist Samuel Jay Keyser of MIT: evolutionists is not
about whether they exist, but about how important they are. Theories that
incorporate them have indeed played a significant role

"Language may well be a spandrel of the mind," Keyser says, and then
waits within the growing sophistication of the neo-Darwinian synthesis, but
they patiently while his questioner looks "spandrel" up in the dictionary—
The first are reforms or complications, not revolutions.

builder who supported domes with arches created spandrels by accident So
some evolutionists have accepted Gould and Lewontin's pluralism in an

[emphasis added), and at first builders paid no attention to spandrels and
irenic spirit, as a call not to abandon but, rather, to improve adaptation-ism.

decorated only the arches, Keyser says. But after a couple of centuries,
builders As Maynard Smith (1991, p. 6) has put it, "The effect of the Gould-
Lewontin began focussing on and decorating the spandrels. In the paper has
been considerable, and on the whole welcome. I doubt if many people have
stopped trying to tell adaptive stories. Certainly I have not done so myself."
Gould and Lewontin's paper has had a welcome effect, then, but one of its
by-products has not been so welcome. The inflammatory rhetoric 3. In his
own discussion of the original QWERTY phenomenon (1991a), Gould
makes a suggesting that these somewhat neglected themes constituted a
major useful point ( 1991a, p. 71), but does not develop it further, so far as I
know: because of alternative to adaptationism opened the floodgates to a lot
of wishful thinking the curious historical sequence of events that led to the
general adoption of the standard QWERTY typewriter keyboard, "An array
of competitions that would have tested by Darwin-dreaders who would
prefer that there not be an adap-tationist QWERTY were never held." That
is, it is simply irrelevant to ask whether QWERTY is a explanation of one
precious phenomenon or another. What would their dimly better design than
alternatives X, Y, and Z, since those alternatives were never pitted imagined
alternative be? Either the "internal necessity" that Gould and against
QWERTY in the marketplace or the design workshop. They just never
came up at Lewontin themselves dismiss as an appeal to mysticism, or utter
cosmic a time when, it seems, they could have made a difference.
Adaptationists should be alert coincidence—an equally mystical nonstarter.
Neither Gould nor Lewontin to the fact that, even though whatever we see
in nature has been "tested against all comers" and not found wanting, only a
Vanishingly small (and biased) subset of all the explicitly endorsed either
wild alternative to adaptation, but this was imaginable competitions has
ever been held. The inevitable parochiality of all actual overlooked by those
who wanted to be dazzled by the authority of these tournaments means that
one must be cautious in characterizing the virtues of the win-eminent
Darwin-doubters.

ners. An old Downeast joke makes the same point more succinctly:
"Mornin', Edna."

'Mornin', Bessie. How's yer husband?" "Compared to what?"

280 BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS

The Spandrel's Thumb 281

same way, Keyser says language—that is, the ability to convey information
Elizabeth Vrba and I have proposed that the restrictive and confusing word
by speech—may have been a thinking and communicating "spandrel" ac-

"preadaptation" be dropped in favor of the more inclusive term "exapta-
cidentally created by the development of some cultural "arch." ... "Lan-
tion"—for any organ not evolved under natural selection for its current
guage is very likely an accidental artifact of some evolutionary quirk of use
—either because it performed a different function in ancestors ( clas-mind."
[Robb 1991]

sical preadaptation) or because it represented a nonfunctional part available
for later co-optation. [Gould 1991b, p. l44n.]

Perhaps Keyser has been misquoted—I am always cautious about accepting
any journalist's account of someone's words, having been burned badly But,
according to orthodox Darwinism, every adaptation is one sort of myself—
but if the quotation is accurate, then for Keyser spandrels are orig-
exaptation or the other—this is trivial, since no function is eternal; if you go
inally accidents, not necessities, don't-cares, or QWERTY phenomena.
Once, back far enough, you will find that every adaptation has developed
out of when I was working at a bronze-casting foundry in Rome, we had an
ex-predecessor structures each of which either had some other use or no use
at plosion in a cast as we were filling it; molten bronze went splashing all
over all. The only phenomena that Gould's exaptation revolution would rule
out the floor. One of the splashes hardened into a fantastic lacy shape that I
are the phenomena that orthodox adaptationists "quickly" disavowed in any
promptly appropriated and turned into a sculpture. Was I exapting a
spandrel?

case: planned-for preadaptations.

(The Dadaist artist Marcel Duchamp, in contrast, would not have been The
spandrel revolution (against panadaptationism ) and the exaptation exapting
a spandrel when he appropriated a urinal as his objet trouve and revolution (
against preadaptationism ) evaporate on closer inspection, since called it a
sculpture, since the urinal had a function in its earlier life.) both
panadaptationism and preadaptationism have been routinely shunned by
Gould himself (1993a, p. 31) has quoted this newspaper story with ap-
Darwinians ever since Darwin himself. These nonrevolutions not only do
not proval, not noticing that Keyser has the art history wrong, and not
expressing challenge any orthodox Darwinian tenet; the coinages they
introduce are as any disagreement with Keyser's definition of a spandrel as
an accident. So likely to confuse as the coinages they were supposed to
replace.

perhaps Keyser is right about the meaning of the term: spandrels are just It
is hard to be a revolutionary if the establishment keeps co-opting you.

accidents available for exaptation. Gould introduced "exaptation" in an
article Gould has often complained that his target, neo-Darwinism,
recognizes the he co-authored with Elizabeth Vrba in 1982, "Exaptation: A
Missing Term in very exceptions he wants to turn into objections, "and this
imposes a great the Science of Form." Their intent was to contrast
exaptation to adaptation.

frustration upon anyone who would characterize the modern synthesis in
Their chief stalking horse, however, was an astonishingly ill-favored term
that order to criticize it" (Gould 1980b, p. 130).

had gained some currency in textbooks on evolution: preadaptation.

The modern synthesis has sometimes been so broadly construed, usually
Preadaption seems to imply that the proto-wing, while doing something by
defenders who wish to see it as fully adequate to meet and encompass else
in its incipient stages, knew where it was going—predestined for a current
critiques, that it loses all meaning by including everything.....

later conversion to flight. Textbooks usually introduce the word and then
Stebbins and Ayala [two eminent defenders] have tried to win an argument

quickly disclaim any odor of foreordination. (But a name is obviously ill-by
redefinition. The essence of the modern synthesis must be its Darwinian
chosen if it cannot be used without denying its literal meaning.) [Gould
core. [Gould 1982a, p. 382.]

1991b, p. 144a]

"Preadaptation" was a terrible term, for exactly the reasons Gould gives, It
is surprising to see a Darwinian give anything an essence, but we can but
notice that he is not claiming that the targets of his criticism committed take
Gould's point, if not his language, there is something about the modern the
major mistake of granting foresight to natural selection—he admits that
synthesis that he wants to overthrow, and before you can overthrow some-
they "quickly disclaimed" this heresy in the very act of introducing the
term.

thing you must pin it down. He has sometimes claimed (e.g., 1983a) he
could They were making the minor mistake of choosing a usage perversely
likely to see the modern synthesis doing his work for him, "hardening" into
a brittle foster this confusion. Switching from "preadaptation" to
"exaptation" might orthodoxy that would be easier to attack. If only! In fact,
no sooner has he well be seen, then, as a wise reform of usage, better suited
to drive home the gone into battle than the modern synthesis has shown its
flexibility, readily orthodox view of adaptationists. Gould, however, resisted
this reformist absorbing his punches, to his frustration. I think he is right,
however, that the interpretation. He wanted exaptation, and spandrels, to
present a "potentially modern synthesis has a "Darwinian core," and I think
he is right that it is his fundamental" and "non-Darwinian" alternative.

target; he just hasn't yet put his finger on it himself.

If the case against "pervasive adaptation" has vanished, then, what about

282 BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS

Punctuated Equilibrium: A Hopeful Monster 283

the case against gradualism, the other main element in the modern synthesis
that Gould sees "breaking down"? Gould's attempted revolution against
gradualism was actually his first; it opened with a salvo in 1972 which
introduced yet another familiar coinage to the vocabulary of evolutionists
and onlookers alike: punctuated equilibrium.

3. PUNCTUATED EQUILIBRIUM: A HOPEFUL MONSTER

Punctuated equilibrium has finally obtained an unambiguous majority—

that is, our theory is now 21 years old. We also, with parental pride (and
therefore, potential bias), believe that primary controversy has ceded to
general comprehension and that punctuated equilibrium has been accepted
by most of our colleagues (a more conventional sort of majority) as a
valuable addition to evolutionary theory.

—STEPHEN JAY GOULD and NILES ELDREDGE 1993, p.

FIGURE 10.6

A, and that it accomplished the same rightward shift in Design Space in the
What needs to be said now, loud and clear, is the truth: that the theory same
amount of time, but by fits and starts, not a steady climb. (These of
punctuated equilibrium lies firmly within the neo-Darwinian synthe-
diagrams can be tricky to think about; the difference between a ramp and a
sis. It always did. It will take time to undo the damage wrought by the
staircase is the point of the contrast, but the giant steps are the sideways
overblown rhetoric, but it will be undone.

moves, not the vertical bits, which are the boring periods of "motion"

through time only, with no motion through design space.)

—RICHARD DAWKINS 1986a, p. 251

There is a familiar trio of reactions by scientists to a purportedly radical
hypothesis: (a) "You must be out of your mind!", (b) "What else is new?

Niles Eldredge and Gould co-authored the paper that introduced the term,
Everybody knows thatV!", and, later—if the hypothesis is still standing—
(c)

"Punctuated Equilibria: An Alternative to Phyletic Gradualism" (1972).

"Hmm. You might be on to something!" Sometimes these phases take years
Whereas orthodox Darwinians, according to them, tended to envision all
ev-to unfold, one after another, but I have seen all three emerge in near
olutionary change as gradual, they argued that, on the contrary, it proceeded
synchrony in the course of a half-hour's heated discussion following a con-
by jerks: long periods of changelessness or stasis—equilibrium—
interrupted ference paper. In the case of the hypothesis of punctuated
equilibrium, the by sudden and dramatic brief periods of rapid change—
punctuations. The phases are particularly pronounced, in large part because
Gould has several basic idea is often illustrated by contrasting a pair of trees
of life (figure 10.6).

times changed his mind about just what he and Eldredge were claiming. In
its We can suppose that the horizontal dimension registers some one aspect
of first appearance, the thesis of punctuated equilibrium was presented not
as a phenotypic variation or body design—we'd need a multidimensional
space to revolutionary challenge at all, but as a conservative correction of
an illusion represent it all, of course. The orthodox view on the left is
pictured as to which orthodox Darwinians had succumbed: paleontologists
were simply showing that all motion through design space (that is, to the
left or right in the mistaken in thinking that Darwinian natural selection
should leave a fossil diagram) is at a more or less steady pace. Punctuated
equilibrium, in contrast, record showing lots of intermediate forms.4 There
was no shows long periods of unchanged design (the vertical line segments)
interrupted by "instantaneous" sideways leaps in design space (the
horizontal segments). To see the central claim of their theory, trace the
evolutionary 4. "During the past thirty years, the allopatric theory [of
speciation] has grown in pop-history of the species at K in each picture. The
orthodox picture shows a more ularity to become, for the vast majority of
biologists, the theory of speciation" (Eldredge or less steady rightward trend
from the diagram's Adam species, A. Their and Gould 1972, p. 92). This
orthodox theory has some striking implications: "The proposed alternative
agrees that K is a descendant of theory of allopatric (or geographic)
speciation suggests a different interpretation of

284 BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS

Punctuated Equilibrium: A Hopeful Monster 285

mention in the first paper of any radical theory of speciation or mutation.
But the most extreme gradualist can allow that evolution could take a
breather for later, about 1980, Gould decided that punctuated equilibrium
was a a while, letting the vertical lines extend indefinitely through time
until some revolutionary idea after all—not an explanation of the lack of
gradualism in new selection pressure somehow arose. During this period of
stasis, selection the fossil record, but a refutation of Darwinian gradualism
itself. This claim pressure would be conservative, keeping the design
roughly constant by was advertised as revolutionary—and now it truly was.
It was too revolu-swiftly eliminating any experimental alternatives that
arose. As the old tionary, and it was hooted down with the same sort of
ferocity the estab-mechanic said, "Don't fix what isn't broke." Whenever a
new selection lishment reserves for heretics like Elaine Morgan. Gould
backpedaled hard, pressure arose, we'd see a "sudden" response of
heightened evolution, a offering repeated denials that he had ever meant
anything so outrageous. In punctuation interrupting the equilibrium. Was
there really a revolutionary that case, responded the establishment, there is

after all nothing new in what point of disagreement being offered by
Eldredge and Gould here, or were you say. But wait. Might there be still
another reading of the hypothesis, they merely offering an interesting
observation about the variability in tempo according to which it is both true
and new? There might be. Phase three is of evolutionary processes and its
predictable effects on the fossil record?

still under way, and the jury is out, considering several different— but all
Punctuationists typically draw the punctuation parts of their revolutionary
nonrevolutionary—alternatives. We will have to retrace the phases to see
diagrams absolutely horizontal (to make strikingly clear that they are what
the hue and cry has been about.

presenting a true alternative to the rampant ramp-view of orthodoxy). This
As Gould and Eldredge have themselves pointed out, there was an obvious
makes it look as if each of the design revisions illustrated takes place in a
problem of scale in such diagrams as figure 10.6. What if we zoomed way
in twinkling, in no time at all. But that is just a misleading artifact of the
huge on the orthodox picture and found that, once we enlarged it
sufficiently, it vertical scale adopted, which shows millions of years to the
inch. The looked like this:

sideways motion is not really instantaneous. It is only "geologically
instantaneous."

An isolated population may take a thousand years to speciate, and its
transformation would therefore appear glacially slow if measured by the
irrelevant scale of our personal lives. But a thousand years, appropriately
recorded in geological time, is only an unresolvable moment, usually
preserved on a single bedding plane [in fossil-bearing rock], in a lifetime of
species that often live for several million years in stasis. [Gould 1992a, pp.

12-14.]

So suppose we zoom in on one of these thousand-year instants, changing
the vertical scale of the time dimension by a few orders of magnitude to see
what might actually be going on (figure 10.8). The horizontal step taken
between time t and time t' will have to be stretched out somehow, and we

must turn it into relatively big steps or little steps or tiny steps, or some
combination thereof.

Were any of the possibilities revolutionary? What exactly were Eldredge
FIGURE 10.7

and Gould maintaining? Here their respective views diverged somewhat, at
least for a while. The view was revolutionary, Gould claimed, because it At
some level of magnification, any evolutionary ramp must look like a
maintained that the punctuations were not just business-as-usual evolution,
staircase. Is figure 10.7 a picture of punctuated equilibrium? If it is, then not
just gradual changes. Remember the old joke about the drunk who falls
orthodox Darwinism was already a theory of punctuated equilibrium. Even
down the elevator shaft and says, on rising, "Look out for the first step—it's
a doozy!"? For a while, Gould was proposing that the first step in the
establishment of any new species was a doozy—a non-Darwinian saltation
paleontological data. If new species arise very rapidly in small, peripherally
isolated local ("somersault" and "saute" come from the same Latin root):
populations, then the great expectation of insensibly graded fossil
sequences is a chi-mera" (Eldredge and Gould 1972, p. 82).

Punctuated Equilibrium: A Hopeful Monster 287

286 BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS

It is this "creative role" of something other than selection that caught the
skeptical attention of Gould's colleagues. To get clear about what caused the
furor, we need to note that our diagram in figure 10.8 is really unable to
distinguish several crucially different hypotheses. The trouble with the
diagram is that it needs more dimensions, so we can compare the steps in
genotype space (the typographical steps in the Library of Mendel) to the
steps in phenotype space (the design innovations in Design Space ) and then
evaluate these differences on a fitness landscape. As we have seen, the
relations between recipe and result are complex, and many possibilities
might be illustrated. We saw in chapter 5 that a small typographical change
in the genome could in principle have a large effect on the phenotype
expressed.

We also saw, in chapter 8, that some typographical changes in the genome
can have no effect at all on the phenotype—there are over a hundred
different ways of "spelling" lysozyme, for instance, and hence more than a
hundred equivalent ways of spelling the order for lysozyme in DNA
codons. We know, then, that at one extreme there can be organisms so
similar in design as to be indistinguishable that nevertheless have large
differences in their Gould's leap

DNA—for instance, you and whoever that person is for whom you are often
FIGURE 10.8

mistaken (your Doppelgänger—no philosophy book would be complete
with mentioning doppelgängers ). At the other extreme, there can be
organisms Speciation is not always an extension of gradual, adaptive allelic
substitu-that are bizarrely different in appearance, but almost identical
genetically. A tion to greater effect, but may represent, as Goldschmidt
argued, a different single mutation in just the wrong place can produce a
monster—the medical style of genetic change—rapid reorganization of the
genome, perhaps non-term for such deformed offspring is terata, Greek
(and Latin) for "monsters."

adaptive. [Gould 1980b, p. 119.]

And there can also be organisms that are almost identical in appearance and
structure, and almost identical in DNA, but dramatically different in fitness
—

Speciation itself, in this view, is not an effect of accumulated adaptations
for instance, fraternal twins one of whom happens to have a gene that gives
it gradually driving populations apart but, rather, a cause with its own, non-
either immunity or susceptibility to some disease.

Darwinian explanation:

A large leap in any of these three spaces, or a saltation, may also be called a
macromutation (meaning a big mutation, not just a mutation in what I have
But in saltational, chromosomal speciation, reproductive isolation comes
called a macro—a macromolecular subsystem ).5 As Ernst Mayr (1960 )
has first and cannot be considered as an adaptation at all. . . . We can, in
fact, observed, there are three different reasons we could call a mutation
big: it is a reverse the conventional view and argue that speciation, by
forming new big step in the Library of Mendel; it produces a radical
difference in entities stochastically, provides raw material for selection.
[Gould 1980b, phenotype (a monster); it produces (one way or another) a
big increase in p. 124.]

fitness—a lot of lifting, in our metaphor for good work done by design
changes.

This suggestion, which I call Gould's leap, is represented in the right-hand
It is possible for the molecular replicating machinery to take large steps in
graph in figure 10.8. Only part of the punctuation process, the gradual, the
Library of Mendel—there are cases in which whole chunks of text get
cleaning-up process at the end, is "Darwinian," Gould claimed: transposed,
inverted, or deleted in a single copying "mistake." It is also If new
Baupläne often arise in an adaptive cascade following the saltational origin
of a key feature, then part of the process is sequential and adaptive, and
therefore Darwinian; but the initial step is not, since selec-5. For an
introduction to the term, see Dietrich's essay "Macromutation" in the
excellent new sourcebook, Keywords in Evolutionary Biology, edited by
Keller and Lloyd (1992 ).

tion does not play a creative role in building the key feature. [Gould 1982a,
p. 383.]

288 BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS

Punctuated Equilibrium: A Hopeful Monster 289

possible for typographical differences to accumulate slowly (and, in
general, had ever endorsed—Goldschmidt's saltationism, they scoffed all
the more randomly) over a long time in the large portion of DNA that never
gets derisively. They knew what he'd said.

expressed, and if these accumulated changes suddenly got expressed, thanks
But did they? I must admit that I thought they did until Steve Gould to some
transposing error, a huge phenotypic effect would be expected. But it
insisted to me that I should check all his various publications, and see for is
only when we turn to the third sense of macromutation—large differences
myself that his opponents were foisting a caricature on him. He struck a in
fitness—that we can get clear about what seemed to be radical in Gould's
nerve; no one knows better than I how frustrating it is to have the skeptics
proposal. The terms "saltation" and "macromutation" have tended to be
used hang a crude but convenient label on one's subtle view. (I'm the guy
who to describe a successful move, a creative move, in which offspring in a
single reputedly denies that people experience colors or pains, and thinks
that generation shift from one region of Design Space to another and
prosper as a thermostats think—just ask my critics.) So I checked. He
chose to dub his result. The idea had been promoted by Richard
Goldschmidt (1933, 1940), denial of gradualism "the Goldschmidt break"
(Gould 1980b), and recom-and made unforgettable by his catchphrase:
"hopeful monsters." What made mended for serious consideration—without
endorsing—some radical Gold-his work notorious was that he claimed that
such leaps were necessary for schmidtian views, but in the same paper he
was careful to say, "We do not speciation to occur.

now accept all his arguments about the nature of variation." In 1982, he
made This suggestion had been roundly rejected by neo-Darwinian
orthodoxy, it clear that the only feature of Goldschmidt's view he was
endorsing was the for the reasons we have already considered. Even before

Darwin, the received idea of "small genetic changes producing large effects
by altering rates of wisdom of biologists was, as Linnaeus said in his classic
work of taxonomy development" (Gould 1982d, p. 338), and in his
introduction to the reprinting (1751), "Natura non facit saltus" —nature
does not make leaps—and this was of Goldschmidt's notorious book, he
expanded on this point: one maxim that Darwin didn't just leave untouched;
he provided enormous support for it. Large leaps sideways in a fitness
landscape will almost never Darwinians, with their traditional preferences
for gradualism and continu-be to your benefit; wherever you currently find
yourself, you are where you ity, might not shout hosannas for large
phenotypic shifts induced rapidly are because this has been a good region of
Design Space for your ancestors—

by small genetic changes that affect early development; but nothing in you
are near the top of some peak or other in the space—so, the bigger the
Darwinian theory precludes such events, for the underlying continuity of
step you take (jumping randomly, of course), the more likely you are to
jump small genetic changes remains. [Gould 1982b, p. xix.]

off a cliff—into the low country, in any case (Dawkins 1986a, ch. 9).

According to this standard reasoning, it is no accident that monsters are
Nothing revolutionary, in other words:

virtually always hopeless. That is what made Goldschmidt's views so
heretical; he knew and accepted that this was true in general, but proposed
One may be excused for retorting: "so what else is new?" Has any biologist
that nevertheless the extremely rare exceptions to this rule were the main
ever denied it? But ... progress in science often demands the recovery of
lifters of evolution.

ancient truths and their rendering in novel ways. [Gould 1982d, pp. 343-
Gould is a famous defender of underdogs and outcasts, and he deplored the
44.]

"ritualistic ridicule" (Gould 1982b, p. xv) to which Goldschmidt had been
subjected by the orthodox. Was Gould going to try to rehabilitate Still, he
could not resist the urge to describe this possibly underappreciated

Goldschmidt? Yes and no. In "Return of the Hopeful Monster" (in Gould
fact about development as a non-Darwinian creative force in evolution,
1980a, p. 188), Gould complained that "defenders of the synthetic theory

"because the constraints that it imposes upon the nature of phenotypic
change made a caricature of Goldschmidt's ideas in establishing their
whipping boy."

guarantee that small and continuous Darwinian variation is not the raw So it
seemed to many biologists that Gould was arguing that punctuated material
of all evolution," for it "relegates selection to a negative role equilibrium
was a theory of Goldschmidtian speciation through mac-

(eliminating the unfit) and assigns the major creative aspect of evolution to
romutation. To them it seemed that Gould was trying to wave his wonderful
variation itself' (Gould 1982d, p. 340).

historian's wand over the tarnished reputation of Goldschmidt, and bring his
It is still not clear how much importance to assign to this possibility in ideas
back into favor. Here the mythic Gould, Refuter of Orthodoxy, principle,
but, in any event, Gould has not pursued it further: "Punctuated seriously
got in the way of the real Gould, so that even his colleagues equilibrium is
not a theory of macromutation" (Gould 1982c, p. 88). Con-succumbed to
the temptation to read what he wrote with a broad brush. They fusion on
this score still abounds, however, and Gould has had to keep scoffed in
disbelief, and then, when he denied that he was endorsing—

issuing his disclaimers: "Our theory entails no new or violent mechanism,

290 BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS

Punctuated Equilibrium: A Hopeful Monster 291

but only represents the proper scaling of ordinary events into the vastness of
geological time" (Gould 1992b, p. 12).

So this was a false-alarm revolution that was largely if not entirely in the
eyes of the beholders. But in that case, the view we find Gould and
Eldredge maintaining once we zoom in beyond the misleading time-
squashing of their geological diagrams, is not the rightmost doozy in figure
10.8 after all, but one of the other, gradual, nonviolent paths illustrated. As
Dawkins has noted, the way in which Eldredge and Gould challenged
"gradualism" was not, in the end, by positing some exciting new
nongradualism, but by saying that evolution, when it occurred, was indeed
gradual—but most of the time it was not even gradual; it was at a dead stop.
The lefthand diagram in figure 10.6 is supposed to represent orthodoxy, but
the feature of it that their theory challenged was not its gradualism—once
we get the scale right, they are gradualists themselves. The feature they

were challenging was what Dawkins (1986a, p. 244) calls "constant
speedism."

Now, has neo-Darwinian orthodoxy ever been committed to constant
speedism? In their original paper, Eldredge and Gould claimed that
paleontologists were mistaken in thinking that orthodoxy required constant
speedism. Was Darwin himself a constant speedist? Darwin often, and
correctly, harped on the claim that evolution could only be gradual (at best,
you might The tree of life published by Darwin in the Origin (1859, p. 117).
The tree depicts a gradualistic pattern of evolution. Each fanlike pattern
represents the slow evolu-say). As Dawkins (1986a, p. 145) says, "For
Darwin, any evolution that had tionary divergence of populations. Darwin
believed that new species, and eventually to be helped over the jumps by
God was not evolution at all. It made a new genera and families, formed by
this kind of slow divergence. [Stanley 1981.]

nonsense of the central point of evolution. In the light of this, it is easy to
see FIGURE 10.9

why Darwin constantly reiterated the gradualness of evolution." But
documentary evidence in support of the claim that he was committed to
points to the presumed implications for orthodoxy of current research on the
constant speedism is not just hard to find; there is a famous passage in
which evolution of impalas and leopards:

Darwin clearly expresses the opposite view, the view that could be called—
in two words—punctuated equilibrium:

Traditional Darwinism would predict a steady modification of the impala
over 3 million years, even without climatic change, because it still needs
Many species once formed never undergo any further change ...; and the to
outrun leopards. But, in fact, neither impalas nor leopards have changed
periods, during which species have undergone modification, though long
very much. They are both too versatile to be worried by climatic change, as
measured by years, have probably been short in comparison with the and
competition between them and with their own kind does not—as periods
during which they retain the same form. [Origin, 4th and subse-Darwin

supposed—provide sufficient selective pressure to cause them to quent eds;
see Peckham 1959, p. 727.]

alter. [Tudge 1993, p. 35.]

Ironically, however, Darwin put just one diagram in Origin, and it happens
to Tudge's presumption that the discovery of three million years of stasis in
the show steadily sloping ramps. Steven Stanley, another major exponent of
impala and leopard would confound Darwin is a familiar one, but it is an
artifact, direct or indirect, of a particular forced reading of the "ramps" in
punctuated equilibrium, reprints this diagram in his book (Stanley 1981, p.

Darwin's (and other orthodox) diagrams.

36) and makes the inference explicit in his caption.

Gould has proclaimed the death of gradualism, but is he himself, then, a
One effect of such claims is that today there is undoubtedly a tradition
gradualist (but not a constant speedist) after all? His denial that his theory
imputing constant speedism either to Darwin himself or to neo-Darwinian
proposes any "violent mechanism" suggests that he is, but it is hard to tell,
orthodoxy. For instance, Colin Tudge, a good science journalist, writing for
on the very same page he says that, according to the theory of punctuated
about Elizabeth Vrba's recent claims concerning the pulse of evolution,
equilibrium,

292 BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS

Punctuated Equilibrium: A Hopeful Monster 293

change does not usually occur by imperceptibly gradual alteration of
enHow can we claim to understand evolution if we only study the percent
or tire species but rather [emphasis added] by isolation of small populations
two of phenomena that construct life's directional history and leave the and
their geologically instantaneous transformation into new species.

vast field of straight-growing bushes—the story of most lineages most of

[Gould 1992a, p. 12.]

the time—in the limbo of conceptual oblivion? [Gould 1993c, p. 16.]

This passage invites us to believe that evolutionary change could not be
both But this path has problems. First, we must be careful not to make the
error

"geologically instantaneous" and "imperceptibly gradual" at the same time.

that is the mirror image of Gould's error about panadaptationism. We must
But that is just what evolutionary change must be when there are no not
make the error of "panequilibriumism." However striking or "pervasive"

saltations. Dawkins dramatizes the point by passing along an eye-opening
the pattern of stasis turns out to be, we know in advance that most lineages
thought experiment by the evolutionist G. Ledyard Stebbins, who imagines
a do not exhibit stasis. Far from it. Remember our difficulties in coloring in
mouse-sized mammal for which he postulates such a tiny selection pressure
Lulu and her conspecifics in chapter 4? Most lineages soon die out, never in
favor of increased size that there would be no increase in size measurable
having time to establish stasis; we will only "see" a species where there is
by biologists studying the animal:

something salient and stable in the record. The "discovery" that all species
exhibit stasis much of the time is like the discovery that all droughts last As
far as the scientist studying evolution on the ground is concerned, then,
longer than a week. We wouldn't notice that there was a drought if it wasn't
a these animals are not evolving at all. Nevertheless they are evolving, very
long-lasting phenomenon. So, since a modicum of stasis is a precondition
for slowly at a rate given by Stebbins' mathematical assumption, and even
at the identification of a species, the fact that all species exhibit some
degree of this slow rate, they would eventually reach the size of elephants.
How long stasis is merely true by definition.

would this take?... Stebbins calculates that at his assumed very slow rate of
evolution, it would take about 12,000 generations.... Assuming a gen-
Nevertheless, the phenomenon of stasis might be a real one in need of

eration time of five years, which is longer than that of a mouse but shorter
explanation. We should ask not why species exhibit stability (something
true than that of an elephant, 12,000 generations would occupy about
60,000

by definition) but why there are salient, identifiable species—that is, why
years. 60,000 years is too short to be measured by ordinary geological
lineages go stable at all. But even here, neo-Darwinism has several obvious
methods of dating the fossil record. As Stebbins says, The origin of a new
adaptationist explanations for why stasis should often occur in a lineage.
We kind of animal in 100,000 years or less is regarded by paleontologists as
have already seen the primary one several times: every species is—must

"sudden" or "instantaneous".' [Dawkins 1986a, p. 242.]

be—a going concern, and going concerns must be conservative; most
deviations from the time-tested tradition will be quickly punished by
Certainly Gould would not call such a locally imperceptible mouse-to-
extinction. Eldredge himself (1989) has suggested that a major reason for
elephant change a violation of gradualism, but in that case his own
opposition stasis is "habitat tracking." Sterelny (1992, p. 45) describes it
this way: to gradualism is left with no support at all from the fossil record.
In fact, he grants this (1982a, p. 383)—the only evidence that his own field
of paleon-As the environment changes, organisms may react by tracking
their old tology is able to provide in opposition to gradualism goes in the
wrong di-habitat. They might move north as the climate cools, rather than
by evolv-rection. Gould may hanker for evidence of a revolutionary speed-
up of one ing adaptations to the cold. [This is not a mistake—Sterelny is a
Southern kind or another, but the fossil record could only show periods of
stasis that Hemisphere philosopher of biology! ] Selection will usually drive
tracking.

suggest that evolution is often not even gradual.

For migrants that follow the habitat (personally or by reproductive dis-But
perhaps this awkward fact can be turned to good use: perhaps the persion)
will typically be fitter than the population fragment that fails to challenge to
orthodoxy should be, not that it can't account for the punc-move, for the

residual fragment will be less well adapted to the new tuations, but that it
can't account for the equilibria! Perhaps Gould's challenge environment and
will be faced with new competition from other migrants to the modern
synthesis should be that it is committed to constant speedism tracking their
old habitat.

after all: that, although Darwin didn't positively deny equilibrium (indeed,
he asserted that it occurs), he can't actually explain equilibrium when it does
Note that habitat tracking is as much a "strategy" of plants as of animals.

occur, and such equilibrium or stasis, it might be argued, is a major pattern
in Indeed, some of the clearest cases of speciation invoke this phenomenon.
As the world in need of explanation. This is in fact the next direction Gould
the icecap recedes after an ice age, the range of some Northern Asian plant
turned in his attack on the modern synthesis.

spreads to the north year after year, "following" the ice, and spreading east

294 BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS

Punctuated Equilibrium: A Hopeful Monster 295

and west as it goes, crossing in the Bering Strait region, and perhaps even
encircling the globe like the herring gulls. Then, as the ice advances south
during the next ice age, it sheers off the connections between the Asian and
North American parts of the family, creating two isolated ranges that then
naturally diverge into distinct species, but as they both move southward in
their respective hemispheres, they continue to look much the same, because
they track their favored climatic conditions, instead of staying put and
going in for further winter adaptations.6

Another possible explanation of punctuated equilibrium is purely
theoretical. Stuart Kauffman and his colleagues have produced computer
models that exhibit behavior in which relatively long periods of stasis are
interrupted by brief periods of change not triggered by any "outside"
interference, so this pattern seems to be an endogenous or internal feature of
the operation of particular sorts of evolutionary algorithms. (For a recent
discussion, see Bak, Flyvbjerg, and Sneppen 1994.)

It is quite clear, then, that equilibrium is no more a problem for the neo-
learned in chapter 4: speciation is an event that can only be retrospectively

Darwinian than punctuation; it can be accounted for, and even predicted.
But identified. Nothing that happens during the sideways move could
distinguish Gould has seen yet another revolution lurking in punctuated
equilibrium.

an anagenetic process from a cladogenetic process. There has been
speciation Maybe the horizontal steps of punctuation are not just
(relatively) rapid steps only if there is a later flourishing of separate
branches that survive long in Design Space; maybe what is important about
them is that they are steps of enough to be identifiable as separate species.

speciation. How could this make a difference? Look at figure 10.10.

Couldn't there be special processes of what we might call hopeful spe-In
both cases, the lineage at K got where it got by exactly the same ciation—or
incipient speciation? Consider a case in which speciation does sequence of
punctuations and equilibria, but the case illustrated on the left occur. Parent-
species A splits into daughter-species B and C.

shows a single species undergoing rapid periods of change followed by long
Now wind back the tape just far enough in time to drop a bomb (an periods
of stasis. Such change without speciation is known as anagenesis.

asteroid, a tidal wave, a drought, poison ) on the earliest members of the B

The case illustrated on the right is an instance of cladogenesis, change via
species, as in the middle diagram. Doing this turns what had been a case of
speciation. Gould claims that the rightward trend in the two cases would
have speciation into something indistinguishable from a case of anagenesis
(on the a different explanation. But how could this be true? Recall what we
right). The fact that the bomb prevents those whose offspring it kills 6.
George Williams (1992, p. 130) disputes the importance of habitat tracking
in stasis, noting that parasites, "seasonal amplitude of insolation" (amount
of sunshine), and many other environmental factors would always be
different after a geographical move, so that populations would never be able
to stay in exactly the same selective environment, and hence would be
subjected to selection pressure in spite of moving. But it seems to me that
much if not all of the adjustment to these selection pressures could be

invisible to paleontology, which can only see in the fossil record the
preserved changes in hard-part design. Habitat tracking could be
responsible for much of the paleontologically observable stasis (and what
other stasis do we know about?), even if Williams is right that this body-
plan stasis would have to mask concurrent nonstasis at most if not all other
design levels in response to the many environmental changes that would
have to accompany any long-range habitat-tracking moves. And unless
many species moved in unison in their habitat tracking, there couldn't be
habitat tracking at all, since other species are such crucial elements in any
species' selective environment.

296 BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS

Punctuated Equilibrium: A Hopeful Monster 297

from ever being grandparents could hardly make a difference to how their
you take to be its offspring that you can be quite sure that there is a direct
path contemporaries got sorted out by selective pressure. That would
require some from the earlier form to the later form. As an epistemological
point, this sort of backward-in-time causation.

completely undercuts the claim that Gould has wanted to make: that most Is
this really true? You may think that this would be true if the event that swift
evolutionary change has been accomplished by speciation. For if, as kicked
off the speciation was a geographic split, guaranteeing the complete
Eldredge says, the fossil record usually shows abrupt shifts without any
causal isolation of the two groups (allopatric speciation), but what if the

"ancestral survival after punctuated branching," and if there is no telling
speciation got under way within a population that formed two reproduc-
tively which of these are cases of punctuated anagenetic change (as opposed
to incommunicative subgroups that competed directly against each other (in
a immigration phenomena), then there is no way of telling from the fossil
form of sympatric speciation)? Darwin proposed, as we noted (see page 43),
record whether speciation is a very frequent or very rare accompaniment of
that competition between closely related forms would be a driving force in
rapid morphological change.7

speciation, so the presence—the nonabsence—of what can be
retrospectively There might still be another way of making sense of Gould's
insistence that it is identified as the first generations of a "rival" species
might be very important speciation, not mere adaptation, that makes the big
difference in evolution.

indeed for speciation, but the fact that these rivals are "going to be" the
What if it turned out that some lineages go in for a lot of punctuation (and,
in founders of a new species could not play a role in the intensity or other
the process, produce lots of daughter species) and other lineages do not, and
features of the competition and hence in the speed or direction of the those
that do not do so tend to die out? Neo-Darwinians usually assume that
horizontal motion in Design Space.

adaptations occur by the gradual transformation of the organisms in
particular We may well suppose that relatively rapid morphological change
(sideways lineages, but "if lineages do not change by transformation, then
long term trends movement) is a normally necessary precondition for
speciation. Rapidity of in lineages can hardly be the result of their slow
transformation" (Sterelny 1992, change is crucially affected by the size of
the gene pool; large gene pools are p. 48). This has long been considered an
interesting possibility (in their original conservative and tend to absorb
innovation attempts without a trace. One way article, Eldredge and Gould
discuss it very briefly, and credit Sewall Wright of making a large gene pool
small is dividing it in two, and this may in fact be 1967 as one of its
sources). Gould's version of the idea (e.g., 1982a) is that the most common
sort of downsizing, but thereafter it makes no difference whole species don't
get revised by the piecemeal redesign of their individual whether or not
nature discards one of the halves (as in the middle graph in members;
species are rather brittle, unchanging things; the shifts in Design figure
10.11). It is the bottleneck of a diminished gene pool that permits the Space
happen (largely? often? always?) because of species extinction and rapid
motion, not the presence of two or more different bottlenecks. If there is
species birth. This idea is what Gould and Eldredge (1993, p. 224) call
"higher speciation, then two whole species pass through their respective
bottlenecks; if level sorting." It is sometimes known as species selection, or
clade selection. It there is no speciation, then one whole species is pressed

through a single is hard to get clear about, but we have the equipment
already at hand to clarify bottleneck. So cladogenesis cannot involve a
process during a punctuation its central point. Remember bait-and-switch?
Gould is in effect proposing a new period different from the process that
occurs in anagenesis, because the application of this fundamental
Darwinian idea: don't think that evolution makes difference between
cladogenesis and anagenesis is definable only in terms of adjustments in
existing lineages; evolution throws away whole lineages, and lets
postpunctuation sequelae. Gould sometimes speaks as if speciation does
make other, different, lineages prosper. It looks as if there are adjustments
to lineages a difference. For instance, Gould and Eldredge (1993, p. 225)
speak of "the over time, but what is really going on is bait-and-switch at the
species level. The crucial requirement of ancestral survival after punctuated
branching" (as right level at which to look for evolutionary trends, he could
then claim, is not shown on the left in figure 10.11), but according to
Eldredge (personal the level of the gene, or the organism, but the whole
species or clade. Instead of communication) this is only a crucial
epistemological requirement for the looking at the loss of particular genes
from gene pools, or the differential death theorist, who needs "ancestral
survival" as evidence of descent.

of particular genotypes within a

His explanation is interesting. The fossil record is loaded with cases in
which one form abruptly stops and another, quite different, form abruptly
appears "in its place." Which of these are cases of swift sideways leaps of 7.
For a similar criticism of Gould, see Ayala 1982. See also G. Williams
1992, pp. 53-evolution, and which are cases of simple displacement due to
sudden im-54; Williams, who defines cladogenesis as the isolation,
however short-lived, of any migration of a rather distant relative? You can't
tell. It is only when you can gene pool, also points out the triviality to
evolutionary theory of short-term cladogenesis see what you take to be the
parent species coexisting for a while with what (pp. 98-100).

298 BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS

Tinker to Evers to Chance 299

population, look at the differential extinction rate of whole species and the
neo-Darwinism? Darwin's account of speciation, as we have just recalled,
differential "birth" rate of species—the rate at which a lineage can speciate
invoked competition between close relatives.

into daughter species.

This is an interesting idea, but it is not, as it first appears to be, a denial of
New species usually win an address by driving out others in overt com-the
orthodox claim that whole species undergo transformation via "phy-letic
petition (a process that Darwin often described in his notebooks as "wedg-
gradualism." Let it be true, as Gould proposes, that some lineages spawn
lots ing" ). This constant battle and conquest provides a rationale for
progress, of daughter species and others don't, and that the former tend to
survive since victors, on average, may secure their success by general
superiority longer than the latter. Look at the trajectory through Design
Space of each in design. [Gould 1989b, p. 8.]

surviving species. It, the whole species, is at any period of time either in
Gould does not like this image of the wedge. What is wrong with it? Well, it
stasis or undergoing punctuated change, but that change itself is a "slow
invites ( he claims ) a belief in progress, but this invitation, we have already
transformation of a lineage," after all. It may be true that the best way of
seen, is as easily declined by neo-Darwinism as it was by Darwin himself.

seeing the long-term macroevolutionary pattern is to look for differences in
Global, long-term progress, amounting to the view that things in the
biosphere

"lineage fecundity" instead of looking at the transformations in the
individual are, in general, getting better and better and better, was denied by
Darwin, and lineages. This is a powerful proposal worth taking seriously,
but it neither although it is often imagined by onlookers to be an implication
of evolution, it refutes nor supplants gradualism; it builds on it.8

is simply a mistake—a mistake no orthodox Darwinians fall for. What else
(The level shift Gould proposes reminds me of the level shift between
might be wrong with the image of the wedge? Gould speaks in the same

hardware and software in computer science; the software level is the right
article ( p. 15 ) of "the plodding predictability of the wedge," and I suggest
level at which to answer certain large-scale questions, but it does not cast
any that this is exactly what offends him in the image: like the ramp of
doubt on the truth of the explanations of the same phenomena at the
hardware gradualism, it suggests a sort of predictable, mindless trudge up
the slopes of level. You would be foolish to try to explain the visible
differences between Design Space (see, e.g., Gould 1993d, ch. 21). The
trouble with a wedge is WordPerfect and Microsoft Word at the hardware
level, and perhaps you simple: it is not a skyhook.

would be foolish to try to explain some of the visible patterns of diversity in
the biosphere by concentrating on the slow transformations of the various
lineages, but that does not mean that they did not undergo slow 4. TINKER
TO EVERS TO CHANCE: THE BURGESS SHALE

transformations at various punctuation marks in their history.) 9

The relative importance of species selection of the sort Gould is now
DOUBLE-PLAY MYSTERY

proposing has not yet been determined. And it is clear that however large a
role species selection comes to play in the latest versions of neo-
Darwinism, Even today a good many distinguished minds seem unable to
accept or it is no skyhook. After all, the way new lineages come onto the
scene as even understand that from a source of noise natural selection alone
and candidates for species selection is by standard gradualistic micro-
mutation—

unaided could have drawn all the music of the biosphere. In effect unless
Gould does want to embrace hopeful monsters. So Gould may have natural
selection operates upon the products of chance and can feed helped
discover a new crane, if that is what it turns out to be: a heretofore nowhere
else; but it operates in a domain of very demanding conditions,
unrecognized or unappreciated mechanism of design innovation, built out
of and from this domain chance is barred.

the standard, orthodox mechanisms. Since my diagnosis, however, is that he

—JACQUES MONOD 1971, p. 118

has all along been hoping for skyhooks, not cranes, I must predict that he
will keep on looking. Could there perhaps be something else about
speciation that is so special that it cannot be handled by

9. "Tinker to Evers to Chance" is a baseball meme, immortalizing the
double-play combination of three Hall of Fame infielders, Joe Tinker,
Johnny (the Crab) Evers, and Frank Chance, who played together for
Chicago in the National League from 1903 to 1912. In 1980, Richard Stern,
a freshman in my introductory philosophy course, wrote an excel-8. Gould's
ideas about "higher level species sorting" must be distinguished from some
lent essay for me, an update on Hume's Dialogues, this time between a
Darwinian lookalike neighbors: the ideas about group selection or
population selection currently (Tinker, of course) and a believer in God
(Evers, of course), ending up, appropriately, under intense and controversial
scrutiny among evolutionists. Those ideas will be dis-with Chance. The
serendipitous multiple convergences of that title, given Gould's own cussed
in the next chapter.

encyclopedic knowledge and love of baseball, is simply irresistible.

300 BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS

Tinker to Evers to Chance

But modern punctuationalism— especially in its application to the va-are
much more complete and three-dimensional than fossils usually are, and
garies of human history— emphasizes the concept of contingency: the their
classification by Charles Walcott early in this century was guided by his
unpredictability of the nature of future stability, and the power of literal
dissection of some of the fossils. He shoehorned the varieties he found
contemporary events and personalities to shape and direct the actual into
traditional phyla, and so matters stood (roughly) until the brilliant path
taken among myriad possibilities.

reinterpretations in the 1970s and 1980s by Harry Whittington, Derek
Briggs,

—STEPHEN JAY GOULD 1992b, p. 21

and Simon Conway Morris, who claimed that many of these creatures—and
they are an astonishingly alien and extravagant lot—had been misclassified;
Gould speaks here not just of unpredictability but of the power of con-they
actually belonged to phyla that have no modern descendants at all, phyla
temporary events and personalities to "shape and direct the actual path" of
never before imagined.

evolution. This echoes exactly the hope that drove James Mark Baldwin to
That is fascinating, but is it revolutionary? Gould (1989a, p. 136) certainly
discover the effect now named for him: somehow we have to get person-
thinks so-. "I believe that Whittington's reconstruction of Opabinia in 1975

alities—consciousness, intelligence, agency—back in the driver's seat. If we
will stand as one of the great documents in the history of human
knowledge."

can just have contingency—radical contingency—this will give the mind
His trio of heroes didn't put it that way (see, e.g., Conway Morris 1989),
and some elbow room, so it can act, and be responsible for its own destiny,
their caution has proven to be prophetic; subsequent analyses have
tempered instead of being the mere effect of a mindless cascade of
mechanical pro-some of their most radical reclassincatory claims after all
(Briggs et al. 1989, cesses! This conclusion, I suggest, is Gould's ultimate
destination, revealed in Foote 1992, Gee 1992, Conway Morris 1992). If it
weren't for the pedestal the paths he has most recently explored.

Gould had placed his heroes on, they wouldn't now seem to have fallen so I
mentioned in chapter 2 that the main conclusion of Gould's Wonderful L

far—the first step was a doozy, and they didn't even get to take the step for
ife: The Burgess Shale and the Nature of History (1989a ) is that if the tape
of themselves.

life were rewound and played again and again, chances are mighty slim that
But in any case, what was the revolutionary point that Gould thought was
we would ever appear again. There are three things about this conclusion
that established by what we may have learned about these Cambrian
creatures?

have baffled reviewers. First, why does he think it is so important?

The Burgess fauna appeared suddenly ( and remember what that means to a
(According to the dust jacket, "In this masterwork Gould explains why the
geologist), and most of them vanished just as suddenly. This nongradual
diversity of the Burgess Shale is important in understanding this tape of our
entrance and exit, Gould claims, demonstrates the fallacy of what he calls
past and in shaping the way we ponder the riddle of existence and the

"the cone of increasing diversity," and he illustrates his claim with a re-
awesome improbability of human evolution.") Second, exactly what is his
markable pair of trees of life.

conclusion—in effect, who does he mean by "we"? And, third, how does he
A picture is worth a thousand words, and Gould emphasizes again and
again, think this conclusion (whichever one it is) follows from his
fascinating with many illustrations, the power of iconography to mislead
even the expert.

discussion of the Burgess Shale, to which it seems almost entirely
unrelated?

Figure 10.12 is another example, and it is his own. On the top, he tells us, is
We will work our way through these questions from third to second to
first.10

the old false view, the cone of increasing diversity; on the bottom, the
Thanks to Gould's book, the Burgess Shale, a mountainside quarry in
improved view of decimation and diversification. But notice that you can
turn British Columbia, has now been elevated from being a site famous
among the bottom picture into a cone of increasing diversification by
simply paleontologists to the status of an international shrine of science, the

birth-stretching the vertical scale. (Alternatively, you can turn the top
picture into a place of ... well, Something Really Important. The fossils
found there date new and approved icon of the bottom sort by squeezing the
vertical scale from the period known as the Cambrian Explosion, a time
around six hun-down, in the style of standard punctuated-equilibrium
diagrams—e.g., on the dred million years ago when the multicellular
organisms really took off, right in figure 10.6.) Since the vertical scale is
arbitrary, Gould's diagrams creating the palm branches of the Tree of Life
of figure 4.1. Formed under don't illustrate any difference at all. The bottom
half of his lower diagram perfectly illustrates a "cone of increasing
diversity," and who knows whether peculiarly felicitous conditions, the
fossils immortalized in the Burgess Shale the very next phase of activity in
the top diagram would be a decimation that turned it into a replica of the
bottom diagram. The cone of increasing diversity is obviously not a fallacy,
if we measure diversity by the number of different 10. Yes, I know, Joe
Tinker played shortstop, not third base, but cut me a little slack, please!

species. Before there were a hundred species there were ten, and before
there were ten there were two, and so

302 BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS

Tinker to Evers to Chance 303

new kingdoms!—have to start out as mere new subvarieties and then
become new species. The fact that from today's vantage point they appear to
be early members of new phyla does not in itself make them special at all.
They might be special, however, not because they were "going to be" the
founders of new phyla, but because they were morphologically diverse in
striking ways. The way for Gould to test this hypothesis would be, as Daw-
kins (1990) has said, to "take his ruler to the animals themselves,
unprejudiced by modern preconceptions about 'fundamental body plans' and
classification. The true index of how unalike two animals are is how unalike
they actually are!" Such studies as have been done to date suggest, however,
that in fact the Burgess Shale fauna, for all their peculiarity, exhibit no
inexplicable or revolutionary morphological diversity after all (e.g., Con-
way Morris 1992, Gee 1992, McShea 1993).

The Burgess Shale fauna were, let us suppose (it is not really known),
wiped out in one of the periodic mass extinctions that have visited the
Earth.

The dinosaurs, as we all know, succumbed to a later one, the Cretaceous
Extinction (otherwise known as the extinction at the K-T boundary),
probably triggered about sixty-five million years ago by the impact of a
huge asteroid. Mass extinction strikes Gould as very important, and as a
challenge to neo-Darwinism: "If punctuated equilibrium upset traditional
expectations (and did it ever!), mass extinction is far worse" (Gould 1985,
p. 242 ). Why?

According to Gould, orthodoxy requires "extrapolationism," the doctrine
that all evolutionary change is gradual and predictable: "But if mass
extinctions are true breaks in continuity, if the slow building of adaptation
in normal times does not extend into predicted success across mass
extinction boundaries, then extrapolationism fails and adaptationism
succumbs" (Gould The cone of increasing diversity. The false but still
conventional iconography of 1992a, p. 53). This is just false, as I have
pointed out: the cone of increasing diversity, and the revised model of
diversification and decimation, suggested by the proper reconstruction of
the Burgess Shale. [Gould 1989a, I cannot see why any adaptationist would
be so foolish as to endorse p. 46.]

anything like "extrapolationism" in a form so "pure" as to deny the pos-
FIGURE 10.12

sibility or even likelihood that mass extinction would play a major role in
pruning the tree of life, as Gould puts it. It has always been obvious that the
it must be, on every branch of the Tree of Life. Species go extinct all the
most perfect dinosaur will succumb if a comet strikes its homeland with a
time, and perhaps 99 percent of all the species that have ever existed are
now force hundreds of times greater than all the hydrogen bombs ever
made.

extinct, so we must have plenty of decimation to balance off the

[Dennett 1993b, p. 43.]

diversification. The Burgess Shale's flourishing and demise may have been
less gradual than that of other fauna, before or since, but that does not

Gould responded (1993e) by quoting a passage from Darwin himself,
clearly demonstrate anything radical about the shape of the Tree of Life.

expressing extrapolationist views. So is adaptationism (today ) committed
to Some say this misses Gould's point: "What is special about the
spectacular this hopeless implication? Here is one instance when Charles
Darwin himself diversity of the Burgess Shale fauna is that these weren't
just new species, but has to count as a straw man, now that neo-Darwinism
has moved on. It is whole new phyla! These were radically novel designs!"
I trust this was never true that Darwin tended to insist, shortsightedly, on the
gradual nature of all Gould's point, because if it was, it was an embarrassing
fallacy of extinctions, but it has long been recognized by neo-Darwinians
that this was retrospective coronation; as we have already seen, all new
phyla—indeed, due to his eagerness to distinguish his view from

304 BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS

Tinker to Evers to Chance 305

the varieties of Catastrophism that stood in the way of acceptance of the
convincing story about why the winners won and the losers lost. Who
theory of evolution by natural selection. We must remember that in
Darwin's knows? One thing we all know: you can't make a scientific
revolution out of day miracles and calamities such as the Biblical Flood
were the chief rival to an almost untestable hunch. (See also Gould 1989a,
pp. 238-39, and Daw-Darwinian thinking. Small wonder he tended to shun
anything that seemed kins 1990 for further observations on this score.)

suspiciously swift and convenient.

So we are still stuck with a mystery about what Gould thinks is so special
The fact (if it is one) that the Burgess fauna were decimated in a mass about
the unique flourishing and demise of these amazing creatures. They
extinction is in any case less important to Gould than another conclusion he
inspire a suspicion in him, but why? Here's a clue, from a talk Gould gave
at wants to draw about their fate: their decimation, he claims (1989a, p.
47n.), the Edinburgh International Festival of Science and Technology, "The

Indi-was random. According to the orthodox view, "Survivors won for
cause,"

vidual in Darwin's World" (1990, p. 12):

but, Gould opines (p. 48), "Perhaps the grim reaper of anatomical designs
was only Lady Luck in disguise." Was it truly just a lottery that fixed all
their In fact almost all the major anatomical designs of organisms appear in
one fates? That would be an amazing—and definitely revolutionary—claim,
es-great whoosh called the Cambrian Explosion about 600 million years
ago.

pecially if Gould then extended it as a generalization, but he has no
evidence You realize that a whoosh or an explosion in geological terms has
a very for such a strong claim, and backs away from it (p. 50): long fuse. It
can take a couple of million years, but a couple of million years in the line
of billions is nothing. And that is not what that world of I am willing to
grant that some groups may have enjoyed an edge (though necessary,
predictable advance ought to look like [emphasis added].

we have no idea how to identify or define them), but I suspect that [the
Lady Luck hypothesis] grasps a central truth about evolution. The Burgess
Really? Consider a parallel. There you sit, on a rock in Wyoming, watch-
Shale, in making this ... interpretation intelligible by the hypothetical ing a
hole in the ground. Nothing much happens for ten, twenty, thirty
experiment of the tape, promotes a radical view of evolutionary pathways
minutes, and then, suddenly—whoosh!—a stream of boiling water shoots
and predictability.

more than thirty meters into the air. It's all over in a few seconds, and then
nothing much happens—just like before, apparently—and you wait for an
Gould's suggestion, then, is not that he can prove the Lady Luck hypothesis,
hour, and still nothing much happens. This, then, was your experience: a but
that the Burgess Shale makes it at least intelligible. As Darwin insisted
single, amazing explosion lasting but a few seconds out of an hour and a
half from the beginning, however, all it takes is "some groups" with an
"edge" to of tedium. Perhaps you would be tempted to think, "Surely this

must be a put the wedge of competition into action. So is Gould just saying
that most of unique and unrepeatable event!"

the competition (or the competition with the largest, most important effects)
So why do they call it Old Faithful? In fact, this geyser repeats itself once
was a true lottery? That is what he "suspects."

every sixty-five minutes, on average, year in and year out. The "shape" of
the What is his evidence for this suspicion? He offers none at all. What he
Cambrian Explosion—its "sudden" onset and equally "sudden" termination
—

offers is the fact that he, looking at these amazing creatures, can't imagine is
no evidence at all for the thesis of "radical contingency." But Gould seems
why some would be better designed than others. They all seem about
equally to think that it is.11 He seems to think that, if we replayed the tape
of life, we bizarre and ungainly to him. That is not good evidence that they
didn't in fact couldn't get another "Cambrian" Explosion the next time, or
ever. But differ dramatically in engineering quality, given their respective
although that might be true, he has not yet offered us a single bit of
evidence.

predicaments. If you don't even try to engage in reverse engineering, you
are Where might such evidence come from? It might come from the
computer not in a good position to conclude that there is no reverse-
engineering simulations of Artificial Life, for instance, which do permit us
to rewind the explanation to be discovered. He does offer a wager (p. 188):
"I challenge any tape again and again. It is surprising that Gould has
overlooked the paleontologist to argue that he could have gone back to the
Burgess seas and, possibility that he might find some evidence for (or
against) his main without the benefit of hindsight, picked out Naroia, Can-
adaspis, Aysheaia, and Sanctaris for success, while identifying Marrella,
Odaraia, Sidneyia, and Leonchoilia as ripe for the grim reaper." That's a
pretty safe sucker bet, since 11. Gould says (1989a, p. 230), in response to
Conway Morris's objections: "The Cam-all such a paleontologist would
have to go on is the outlines of organs visible brian explosion was too big,
too different, and too exclusive." See also the remarks on the in fossil

traces. But it could be lost. Some really ingenious reverse engineer
unpredictability of "zigzag" trajectories ( Gould 1989b).

might someday be able to tell an awfully

Tinker to Evers to Chance 307

306 BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS

We have reached second base. Just what is Gould's claim about contin-
conclusion by looking at the field of Artificial Life, but he never mentions
the gency? He says (1990, p. 3) that "the most common misunderstanding
of prospect. Why not? I don't know, but I do know Gould is not fond of
evolution, at least in lay culture," is the idea that "our eventual appearance"
is computers, and to this day does not even use a computer for word-
processing;

"somehow intrinsically inevitable and predictable within the confines of the
that might have something to do with it.

theory." Our appearance? What does that mean? There is a sliding scale on
A much more important clue, surely, is the fact that when you do rerun the
which Gould neglects to locate his claim about rewinding the tape. If by
"us"

tape of life, you find all sorts of evidence of repetition. We already knew
that, he meant something very particular—Steve Gould and Dan Dennett,
let's of course, because convergent evolution is nature's own way of
replaying the say—then we wouldn't need the hypothesis of mass extinction
to persuade us tape. As Maynard Smith says:

how lucky we are to be alive; if our two moms had never met our respective
dads, that would suffice to consign us both to Neverland, and of course the
In Gould's "replay from the Cambrian" experiment, I would predict that
same counterfactual holds true of every human being alive today. Had such
a many animals would evolve eyes, because eyes have in fact evolved many
sad misfortune befallen us, this would not mean, however, that our
respective times, in many kinds of animal. I would bet that some would

evolve pow-offices at Harvard and Tufts would be unoccupied. It would be
astonishing if ered flight, because flight has evolved four times, in two
different phyla; but the Harvard occupant's name in this counterfactual
circumstance was I would not be certain, because animals might never get
out on the land.

"Gould," and I wouldn't bet that its occupant would be a habitue of bowling
But I agree with Gould that one could not predict which phyla would alleys
and Fenway Park, but I would bet that its occupant would know a lot
survive and inherit the earth. [Maynard Smith 1992, p. 34]

about paleontology, would give lectures and publish articles and spend
thousands of hours studying fauna ( not flora—Gould's office is in the
Maynard Smith's last point is a sly one: if convergent evolution reigns, it
Museum of Comparative Zoology ). If, at the other extreme, by "us" Gould
doesn't make any difference which phyla inherit the earth, because of bait-
meant something very general, such as "air-breathing, land-inhabiting verte-
and-switch! Combining bait-and-switch with convergent evolution, we get
brates," he would probably be wrong, for the reasons Maynard Smith men-
the orthodox conclusion that whichever lineage happens to survive will
tions. So we may well suppose he meant something intermediate, such as
gravitate towards the Good Moves in Design Space, and the result will be

"intelligent, language-using, technology-inventing, culture-creating beings."

hard to tell from the winner that would have been there if some different
This is an interesting hypothesis. If it is true, then contrary to what many
lineage had carried on. Consider the kiwi, for instance. It has evolved in
New thinkers routinely suppose, the search for extra-terrestrial intelligence
is as Zealand, where it didn't have any mammals to compete with, and it has
quixotic as the search for extra-terrestrial kangaroos—it happened once,
here, converged on an amazing number of mammalian features—basically,
it's a but would probably never happen again. But Wonderful Life offers no
bird that pretends it's a mammal. Gould himself has written about the kiwi
evidence in its favor (Wright 1990 ); even if the decimations of the Burgess
and its remarkably large egg (in 1991b), but as Conway Morris points out in
Shale fauna were random, whatever lineages happened to survive would,
achis review (1991, p. 6):

cording to standard neo-Darwinian theory, proceed to grope towards the
Good Tricks in Design Space.

... there is something else about the kiwi that receives only passing men-We
have answered our second question. We are finally ready to tackle first tion,
and that is the extraordinary convergence between kiwis and mam-base:
why would this thesis be of great importance, whichever way it came mals.
... I am sure Gould would be the last to deny convergence, but surely it
undermines much of his thesis of contingency.

out? Gould thinks that the hypothesis of "radical contingency" will upset
our equanimity, but why?

Gould does not deny convergence—how could he?—but he does tend to We
talk about the "march from monad to man" (old-style language again)
ignore it. Why? Perhaps because, as Conway Morris says, it is the fatal as
though evolution followed continuous pathways of progress along
weakness in his case for contingency. (See also Maynard Smith 1992, Daw-
unbroken lineages. Nothing could be furtiier from reality. [Gould 1989b,
kins 1990, Bickerton 1993)

P-14.]

So now we have an answer to our third question. The Burgess Shale fauna
inspire Gould because he mistakenly thinks that they provide evidence for
his What could not be further from reality? At first it might appear as if
Gould thesis of "radical contingency." They might illustrate the thesis—but
we was saying here that there is no continuous, unbroken lineage between
the won't know until we do the sort of research that Gould himself has
ignored.

308 BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS

Tinker to Evers to Chance 309

"monads" and us, but surely there is. There is no more secure implication of
to consider, and rule out, alternative hypotheses. As I said at the outset, I am
Darwin's great idea than that. As I put it in chapter 8, it is not controversial

more interested in the reasons that have held the myth together than I am in
that we are all direct descendants of macros—or monads—simple
precellular the actual motives of the actual man, but it might seem
disingenuous for me replicators under one name or another. So what can
Gould be saying here?

not even to mention the obvious "rival" explanations crying to be
considered: Perhaps we are meant to put the emphasis on "pathways of
progress" —it is politics and religion. (It could well be that there is a
political or religious the belief in progress that is so far from the truth. The
pathways are motivation behind the yearning for skyhooks I impute to him,
but those continuous, unbroken lineages all right, but not lineages of global
progress.

would not be rival hypotheses; they would be elaborations of my This is
true, but so what?

interpretation, postponable to another occasion. Here I must briefly consider
There aren't global pathways of progress, but there is incessant local
whether one of these—politics or religion—might offer a simpler, more
improvement. This improvement seeks out the best designs with such great
straightforward interpretation of his campaigns, obviating my analysis.
Many reliability that it can often be predicted by adaptationist reasoning.
Replay the of Gould's critics have thought so; I think they are missing the
more tape a thousand times, and the Good Tricks will be found again and
again, by interesting possibility.)

one lineage or another. Convergent evolution is not evidence of global
Gould has never made a secret of his politics. He learned his Marxism from
progress, but it is overwhelmingly good evidence of the power of processes
his father, he tells us, and until quite recently he was very vocal and active
in of natural selection. This is the power of the underlying algorithms,
mindless left-wing politics. Many of his campaigns against specific
scientists and all the way down, but, thanks to the cranes it has built along
the way, specific schools of thought within science have been conducted in
explicitly wonderfully capable of discovery, recognition, and wise decision.
There is no political—indeed, explicitly Marxist—terms, and have often
had right-wing room, and no need, for skyhooks.

thinkers as their targets. Not surprisingly, his opponents and critics have
often Can it be that Gould thinks his thesis of radical contingency would
refute supposed, for instance, that his punctuationism was just his Marxist
antipathy the core Darwinian idea that evolution is an algorithmic process?
That is my for reform playing itself out in biology. Reformers are the worst
enemies of tentative conclusion. Algorithms, in the popular imagination, are
algorithms revolutionaries, as we all know. But that, I think, is only a
superficially for producing a particular result. As I said in chapter 2,
evolution can be an plausible reading of Gould's reasons. After all, John
Maynard Smith, his polar algorithm, and evolution can have produced us by
an algorithmic process, opposite in the evolution controversies, has a
Marxist background as rich and without its being true that evolution is an
algorithm for producing us. But if active as Gould's, and there are others
with left-wing sympathies against whom you didn't understand that point,
you might think:

Gould has directed attacks. (And then there are all the ACLU liberals like
myself, though I doubt if he knows or cares.) Following his return from a
visit If we are not the predictable result of evolution, evolution cannot be an
to Russia, Gould (1992b) drew attention, as often before, to the difference
algorithmic process.

between the gradualness of reform and the suddenness of revolution. In this
interesting piece, Gould (p. 14) reflects on his experiences in Russia, and
the And then you would be strongly motivated to prove "radical
contingency" if failure of Marxism there— 'Yes, the Russian reality does
discredit a specific you wanted to show that evolution wasn't just an
algorithmic process. It Marxist economics"—but goes on to say that Marx
has been proven right about might not have recognizable skyhooks in it, but
at least we'd know it wasn't

"the validity of the larger model of punctuational change." That does not
mean all done with nothing but cranes.

that, for Gould, Marx's economic and social theory was never the point, but
it Is it likely that Gould could be so confused about the nature of
algorithms?

is not hard to believe that Gould would keep his attitudes about evolution
on As we shall see in chapter 15, Roger Penrose, one of the world's most
board while jettisoning some political baggage that had outlasted its
welcome.

distinguished mathematicians, wrote a major book ( 1989) on Turing As for
religion, my own interpretation is, in one important sense, a hy-machines,
algorithms, and the impossibility of Artificial Intelligence, and his pothesis
about Gould's religious yearnings. I see his antipathy to Darwin's whole
book is based on that confusion. This is not really such an implausible
dangerous idea as fundamentally a desire to protect or restore the Mind-
first, error, on either thinker's part. A person who really doesn't like
Darwin's top-down vision of John Locke—at the very least to secure our
place in the dangerous idea often finds it hard to get the idea in focus.

cosmos with a skyhook. ( Secular Humanism is a religion for some, and
they That concludes my Just So Story about how Stephen Jay Gould
became the sometimes think that Humanity cannot be special enough to
matter if it is the Boy Who Cried Wolf. A good adaptationist should not just
rest content with product of merely algorithmic processes, a theme I will
explore in a plausible story, however. At the very least, an effort should be
made 310 BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS

Tinker to Evers to Chance 311

winian theory. Gould seems to think that he should discourage his fellow
later chapters.) Gould has certainly seen his task as one with cosmic impli-
evolutionists from drawing grand philosophical conclusions from their
work, cations, something that is especially clear in the epiphanies about the
Burgess but if so he has been trying to deny to others what he allows
himself. In the Shale in Wonderful Life. That makes his world-view a
question of religion in concluding sentence of Wonderful Life (1989a, p.
323), Gould is ready to one important sense, whether or not it has among its
direct ancestors the draw a fairly specific religious conclusion from his own
consideration of the official creed of his religious heritage—or any other
organized religion.

implications of paleontology:

Gould often quotes the Bible in his monthly columns, and sometimes the
rhetorical effect is striking. Surely, one thinks, an article with this opening
We are the offspring of history, and must establish our own paths in this
sentence has to have been written by a religious man: "Just as the Lord
holds most diverse and interesting of conceivable universes—one
indifferent to the whole world in his hands, how we long to enfold an entire
subject into a our suffering, and therefore offering us maximal freedom to
thrive, or to witty epigram" (Gould 1993e, p. 4).

fail, in our own chosen way.

Gould has often asserted that there is no conflict between evolutionary
theory and religion.

Curiously enough, this strikes me as a fine expression of the implications
Unless at least half my colleagues are dunces, there can be—on the most of
Darwin's dangerous idea, not at all in conflict with the idea that evolution
raw and empirical grounds—no conflict between science and religion. I is
an algorithmic process. It is certainly an opinion I wholeheartedly share.

know hundreds of scientists who share a conviction about the fact of Gould,
however, seems to think the view he is combating so vigorously is
evolution, and teach it in the same way. Among these people I note an
deterministic and ahistorical, in conflict with this creed of freedom. "Hyper-
entire spectrum of religious attitudes—from devout daily prayer and wor-
Darwinism," Gould's bogey, is simply the claim that no skyhooks are
needed, ship to resolute atheism. Either there's no correlation between
religious at any point, to explain the upward trends of the branches of the
Tree of Life.

belief and confidence in evolution—or else half of these people are fools.

Like others before him, Gould has tried to show the existence of leaps,
speed-

[Gould 1987, p. 68.]

ups, or other inexplicable trajectories—inexplicable by the tools of "hyper-
Darwinism." But however "radically contingent" those trajectories may
have Some more realistic alternatives would be that those evolutionists who
see been, however "punctuated" the pace of travel has been, whether by
"non-no conflict between evolution and their religious beliefs have been
careful Darwinian" saltations or unfathomed "mechanisms of speciation,"
this does not to look as closely as we have been looking, or else hold a
religious view not create any more elbow room for "the power of
contemporary events and that gives God what we might call a merely
ceremonial role to play (more on personalities to shape and direct the actual
path taken among myriad this in chapter 18). Or perhaps, with Gould, they
are careful to delimit the possibilities." No more elbow room was needed
(Dennett 1984).

presumed role of both science and religion. The compatibility that Gould
sees One striking effect of Gould's campaign on contingency is that he ends
up between science and religion holds only so long as science knows its
place turning Nietzsche upside down. Nietzsche, you will recall, thought
that and declines to address the big questions. "Science does not deal with
nothing could be more terrifying, more world-shattering, than the thought
questions of ultimate origins" (Gould 1991b, p. 459 ). One way of that if
you kept replaying the tape, it would all happen again and again and
interpreting Gould's campaigns within biology over the years might be as an
again—eternal recurrence, the sickest idea that anybody ever had. Nietzsche
attempt to restrict evolutionary theory to a properly modest task, creating a
viewed his task as teaching people to say "Yes!" to this awful truth. Gould,
cordon sanitaire between it and religion. He says, for instance: on the other
hand, thinks he must assuage the people's terror when confronted Evolution,
in fact, is not the study of origins at all. Even the more restricted with the
denial of this idea, if you kept replaying the tape, it wouldn't ever (and
scientifically permissible) question of life's origin on our earth lies happen
again! Are both propositions equally mind-boggling?12 Which is outside its
domain. (This interesting problem, I suspect, falls primarily worse? Would
it happen again and again, or never again? Well, Tinker might within the
purview of chemistry and the physics of self-organizing sys-say, either it
would or it wouldn't, there's no denying that—and in tems. ) Evolution

studies the pathways and mechanisms of organic change following the
origin of life. [Gould 1991b, p. 455.]

This would rule the entire topic of chapter 7 out of bounds to evolutionary
12. Philip Morrison has pointed out that if the proposition that there is other
intelligent theory, but, as we have seen, that has become the very foundation
of Dar-life in the universe is mind-boggling, so is its denial. There are no
ho-hum truths of cosmology.

312 BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS

fact the truth is a mixture of both: a little bit of Chance, a little bit of Ever.

That's Darwin's dangerous idea, like it or not.

CHAPTER ELEVEN

CHAPTER 10: Gould's self-styled revolutions, against adaptationism,
gradualism, and extrapolationism, and for "radical contingency," all
evaporate, Controversies Contained

their good points already firmly incorporated into the modern synthesis,
and their mistaken points dismissed. Darwin's dangerous idea emerges
strengthened, its dominion over every corner of biology more secure than
ever.

CHAPTER 11: A review of all the major charges that have been leveled at
Darwin's dangerous idea reveals a few surprisingly harmless heresies, a
few sources of serious confusion, and one deep but misguided fear: if
Darwinism is true of us, what happens to our autonomy?

1. A CLUTCH OF HARMLESS HERESIES

/ find on re-reading it that the picture it presents is close to the one I would
paint if I were to start afresh, and write a wholly new book.

—JOHN MAYNARD SMITH, introduction, 1993

edition of his 1958 book, The Theory of

Evolution

Before turning in part III to an examination of Darwin's dangerous idea
applied to humanity (and the humanities), let's pause to take stock of our
survey of controversies within biology proper. Gould has spoken of the

"hardening" of the modern synthesis, but also voiced his frustration about
how the modern synthesis keeps shifting in front of his eyes, making it
difficult to get off a good shot. Its defenders keep changing the story, co-
opting revolutionaries by incorporating the good points they make into the
synthesis. How secure is the modern synthesis—or its unnamed successor,
if you think it has changed too much to keep its old title? Is the current
embodiment of Darwinism too hard or too soft? Like Goldilocks' favorite
bed, it has proven to be just right: hard where it had to be, and compliant
about those issues that are open for further investigation and debate.

To get a good sense of what is hard and what is soft, we may stand back a
bit and survey the whole field. Some people would still love to destroy the
credentials of Darwin's dangerous idea, and we can help them by pointing
to controversies on which they needn't waste their energies, since no matter
how they come out, Darwin's idea will survive intact or strengthened. And
then we can also point out those hard, fixed points which, if destroyed,
would truly overthrow Darwinism—but they are fixed for good reasons,
and are about as likely to budge as the Pyramids.

Let's consider first some tempting heresies that would not overthrow 314
CONTROVERSIES CONTAINED

A Clutch of Harmless Heresies 315

Darwinism even if they were confirmed. Probably the best known has been
eses about exactly how life started. The hypothesis that life began on Earth
has championed in recent years by the maverick astronomer Fred Hoyle,
who the virtue of putting some admirably tough constraints on storytelling:
the whole argues that life did not originate—could not have originated—on
Earth, but has story has to unfold in under five billion years, and it has to
start with conditions to have been "seeded" from outer space (Hoyle 1964,
Hoyle and Wick-known to have existed on Earth in the early days.

Biologists like having to work ramasinghe 1981). Francis Crick and Leslie
Orgel (1973, and Crick 1981) within these constraints; they want deadlines
and a short list of raw materials, the point out that this idea of panspermia
has been championed in various forms more demanding the better.1 So they
hope that no hypothesis will ever be since early in the century, when
Arrhenius ( 1908) coined the term, and, confirmed that opens up vast
possibilities that will be well-nigh impossible for however unlikely it may
seem, it is not an incoherent idea. It is not (yet) them to evaluate in detail.
The arguments that Hoyle and others have given for disprovable that
primitive life forms (something as "simple" as a macro or as panspermia all
belong in the phylum of "otherwise there's not enough time," and complex
as a bacterium) arrived by asteroid or comet from some other region
evolutionary theorists much prefer to keep the geological deadlines intact
and of the universe and colonized our planet. Crick and Orgel go a step
further: it is hunt for more cranes to do all the lifting in the time available.
So far, this policy even possible that the panspermia was directed, that life
began on Earth as a has borne excellent results. If Hoyle's hypothesis were
someday confirmed, it result of our planet's being deliberately "infected" or
colonized by life forms would be a gloomy day for evolutionary theorists,
not because it would overthrow from somewhere else in the universe that
got a head start on us, and indeed Darwinism, but because it would make
important features of Darwinism less indirectly produced us. If we can now
send a spacecraft loaded with life forms disconfirmable, more speculative.

to another planet—and we can, but should not—then, by parity of
reasoning, For the same reason, biologists would be hostile to any
hypothesis that others could have done it. Since Hoyle—unlike Crick and
Orgel—has voiced proposed that ancient DNA had been tampered with by
gene-splicers from the suspicion (1964, p. 43) that, unless panspermia is
true, "life has little another planet who became high-tech before we did, and
played a trick on us.

meaning, but must be judged a mere cosmic fluke," it is not surprising that
Biologists would be hostile to the hypothesis, but would have a hard time
many, including Hoyle himself, have supposed that panspermia, if
confirmed, disproving it. This raises such an important point about the
nature of evidence would shatter Darwinism, that dreaded threat to the

meaning of life. And since in evolutionary theory that it is worth exploring
in greater detail, with the panspermia is often treated with derision by
biologists—"Hoyle's Howler"—

help of a few thought experiments (drawn from Dennett 1987b, 1990b).

the illusion is fostered that here is a grave threat indeed, one that strikes at
the As many commentators have noted, evolutionary explanations are ines-
very core of Darwinism. Nothing could be further from the truth. Darwin
capably historical narratives. Ernst Mayr (1983, p. 325) puts it this way.

himself surmised that life began on Earth in some warm little pond, but it

"When one attempts to explain the features of something that is the product
of might equally have started in some hot, sulfurous underground pressure-
cooker evolution, one must attempt to reconstruct the evolutionary history
of this (as has recently been proposed by Stetter et al. 1993), or, for that
matter, on feature." But particular historical facts play an elusive role in
such ex-some other planet, whence it traveled here after some astronomical
collision planations. The theory of natural selection shows how every
feature of the pulverized its birthplace. Wherever and whenever life started,
it had to natural world can be the product of a blind, unforesightful,
nonteleolog-ical, bootstrap itself by some version of the process we
explored in chapter 7—that ultimately mechanical process of differential
reproduction over long periods of is what orthodox Darwinism insists upon.
And as Manfred Eigen has pointed time. But of course some features of the
natural world—the short legs of out, panspermia would do nothing to solve
the difficult problem of how this dachshunds and Black Angus beef cattle,
the thick skins of tomatoes—are the bootstrapping happened: "The
discrepancy between the numbers of sequences products of artificial
selection, in which the goal of the testable in practice and imaginable in
theory is so great that attempts at explanation by shifting the location of the
origin of life from Earth to outer space do not offer an acceptable solution
to the dilemma. The mass of the 1. For just this reason, biologists have
mixed emotions about the recent (apparent) universe is 'only' 1029 times,
and its volume 'only' 1057 times, that of the Earth"

discovery by J. William Schopf (1993) of fossil microbes roughly a billion
years older (Eigen 1992, p. 11).

(3.5 billion instead of 2.5 billion) than orthodoxy has recently supposed. If
confirmed, The reason orthodoxy prefers to assume a birthplace on Earth is
that this is this would drastically revise a lot of standard assumptions about
the intermediate dead-the simplest and most scientifically accessible
hypothesis. That does not lines, giving more time for the evolution of
advanced forms ("Whew!"), but only by reducing the time available for the
process of molecular evolution to get all the way to make it true. Whatever
happened, happened. If Hoyle is right, then (darn it) microbes ("Uh oh!").

we will find it much harder to confirm or disconfirm any detailed hypoth-A
Clutch of Harmless Heresies 317

316 CONTROVERSIES CONTAINED

are the most powerful cranes we have yet discovered. Are there designs that
process, and the rationale of the design aimed for, actually did play a role in
simply could not be erected without the help of this particular crane? If
there the process. In these cases, the goal was explicitly represented in the
minds of are designs that cannot be approached by a gradual, stepwise
redesign process the breeders who did the selecting. So the theory of
evolution must allow for in which each step is at least no worse for the
gene's survival chances than its the existence of such products, and such
historical processes, as special predecessor, then the existence of such a
design in nature would seem to cases—organisms designed with the help of
supercranes. Now the question require, at some point in its ancestry, a
helping hand from a foresightful arises: can such special cases be
distinguished in retrospective analysis?

designer—either a gene-splicer, or a breeder who somehow preserved the
Imagine a world in which actual hands from another galaxy supplemented
necessary succession of intermediate backsliders until they could yield their
the "hidden hand" of natural selection. Imagine that natural selection on this
sought progeny. But could we ever conclusively establish that some design
planet was aided and abetted over the eons by visitors: tinkering, farsighted,
had this feature of requiring such a saltation in its ancestry? For over a

reason-representing organism-designers, like the animal- and plant-breeders
century, skeptics have hunted for such cases—thinking that, if they ever of
our actual world, but not restricting themselves to "domesticated"

found one, it would conclusively refute Darwinism—but so far their efforts
organisms designed for human use. (To make it vivid, we may suppose they
have shown a systematic weakness.

treated Earth as their "theme park," creating whole phyla for educational or
entertainment purposes.) These bioengineers would have actually
formulated, Consider the most familiar example, the wing. Wings could not
evolve in one and represented, and acted on, the rationales of their designs
—just like fell swoop, runs the standard skeptical argument; and if we
imagine—as we automobile engineers or our own contemporary gene-
splicers. Then, let's Darwinians must—that wings evolved gradually, we
must admit that partially suppose, they absconded. Now, would their
handiwork be detectable by any completed wings would not only not have
provided partial value but would imaginable analysis by biologists today?

have been a positive hindrance. We Darwinians need admit no such thing.

If we found that some organisms came with service manuals attached, this
Wings that are good only for gliding (but not powered flight) have manifest
net would be a dead giveaway. Most of the DNA in any genome is
unexpressed—

benefits for many actual creatures, and still stubbier, less aerodynamically
often called "junk DNA"—and NovaGene, a biotechnology company in
Hous-effective protuberances could have evolved for some other reason,
and then ton, has found a use for it. They have adopted the policy of "DNA
branding": been exapted. Many versions of this story—and other stories—
have been told writing the nearest codon rendering of their company
trademark in the junk to fill in the gap. Wings are not an embarrassment to
orthodox Darwinians, or if DNA of their products. According to the
standard abbreviations for the they are, they are an embarrassment of riches.
There are too many different amino-acid specifiers, asparagine, glutamine,
valine, alanine, glycine, glu-plausible ways of telling the story of how
functioning wings could have tamic acid, asparagine, glutamic acid =

NQVAGENE ( reported in Scientific evolved by gradual increments! This
shows how hard it would be for anyone to American June 1986, pp. 70-71).
This suggests a new exercise in "radical devise an insurmountable argument
to prove that a particular feature must have translation" (Quine I960) for
philosophers: how, in principle or in practice, arisen by a saltation, but at
the same time it shows that it would be just as hard could we confirm or
disconfirm the hypothesis that trademarks—or service to prove that a
feature must have arisen without a saltation, unaided by human manuals or
other messages—were discernible in the junk DNA of any spe-or other
intelligent hands.

cies? The presence of functionless DNA in the genome is no longer
regarded Indeed, all the biologists I have queried on this point have agreed
with me as a puzzle. Dawkins' ( 1976) selfish-gene theory predicts it, and
elaborations that there are no sure marks of natural, as opposed to artificial,
selection. In on the idea of "selfish DNA" were simultaneously developed
by Doolittle and chapter 5, we traded in the concept of strict biological
possibility and Sapienza (1980) and Orgel and Crick (1980) (see Dawkins
1982, ch. 9, for the impossibility for a graded notion of biological
probability, but even in its details). That doesn't show that junk DNA
couldn't have a more dramatic terms, it is not clear how one could grade
organisms as "probably" or "very function, however, and hence it could
have a meaning after all. Our imagined probably" or "extremely probably"
the products of artificial selection. Should intergalactic interlopers could as
readily have exapted the junk DNA for their this conclusion be viewed as a
terrible embarrassment to the evolutionists in own purposes as the
NovaGene engineers exapted it for theirs.

their struggle against creationists? One can imagine the headlines-.
"Scientists Finding the high-tech version of "Kilroy was here" written in the
genome Concede: Darwinian Theory Cannot Disprove Intelligent Design!"
It would be of a cabbage or a king would be unnerving, but what if no such
deliberate foolhardy, however, for any defender of neo-Darwinism to claim
that clues were left around? Would a closer look at the organism designs
them-contemporary evolution theory gives one the power to read history so
finely selves—the phenotypes—reveal some telltale discontinuities? Gene-

splicers from present data as to rule out the earlier historical pres-318
CONTROVERSIES CONTAINED

A Clutch of Harmless Heresies 319

ically coherent (however lame and ad hoc) for Darwinians to reply that
what ence of rational designers—a wildly implausible fantasy, but a
possibility they were being shown was telling evidence for the surprising
hypothesis of after all.

intergalactic interlopers! The power of the theory of natural selection is not
In our world today, there are organisms we know to be the result of the
power to prove exactly how (pre)history was, but only the power to prove
foresighted, goal-seeking redesign efforts, but that knowledge depends on
our how it could have been, given what we know about how things are.

direct knowledge of recent historical events; we've actually watched the
Before leaving this curious topic of unwelcome but nonfatal heresies, let's
breeders at work. These special events would not be likely to cast any
fossily consider one that is a bit more realistic. Did life on Earth arise just
once, or shadows into the future. To take a simpler variation on our thought
perhaps many times? Orthodoxy supposes it happened just once, but there
is experiment, suppose we were to send "Martian" biologists a laying hen, a
no skin off its back if in fact life arose twice or ten or a hundred times.

Pekingese dog, a barn swallow, and a cheetah and ask them to determine
However improbable the initial bootstrapping event may have been, we
must which designs bore the mark of intervention by artificial selectors.
What not commit the Gambler's Fallacy of supposing that after it happened
once, could they rely on? How would they argue? They might note that the
hen did the odds rose against its happening again. Still, the question of how
many not care "properly" for her eggs; some varieties of hen have had their
instinct times life arose independently opens up some interesting prospects.
If at least for broodiness bred right out of them, and would soon become
extinct were it some of the assignments in the DNA are purely arbitrary,
then might there not for the environment of artificial incubators human
beings have provided not have been two different genetic languages
coexisting side by side, like for them. They might note that the Pekingese

was pathetically ill-equipped to French and English, only entirely
unrelated? This has not been discovered—

fend for itself in any demanding environment they could imagine. But the
DNA has clearly coevolved with its parent, RNA—but that does not yet
show barn swallow's innate fondness for carpentered nest sites might fool
them into that life didn't arise more than once, because we don't (yet) know
how wide the view that it was some sort of pet, and whatever features of the
cheetah the scope for variation in genetic code actually was.

convinced them that it was a creature of the wild might also be found in
Suppose there were exactly two equally viable and constructible DNA
greyhounds, and be features we know to have been patiently encouraged by
languages, Mendelese (ours) and Zendelese. If life arose twice, there would
breeders. Artificial environments are themselves a part of nature, after all,
so be four equiprobable possibilities: both times Mendelese, both times
Zen-it is unlikely that there are any clear signs of artificial selection that can
be delese, Mendelese and then Zendelese, or Zendelese and then
Mendelese. If read off an organism in the absence of insider information on
the actual we ran the tape of life many times, and looked at the times in
which life arose history that created the organism.

twice, we'd expect that half the time both languages would get created, but
in Prehistoric fiddling by intergalactic visitors with the DNA of earthly spe-
one quarter of those replays only Mendelese would appear. In those worlds,
cies cannot be ruled out, except on the grounds that it is an entirely
gratuitous the DNA language of all organisms would be the same, even
though another fantasy. Nothing we have found (so far) on Earth so much
as hints that such a language was just as possible. This shows that the
"universality" (at least on hypothesis is worth further exploration. And
remember—I hasten to add, lest our planet) of the DNA language does not
permit a valid inference that all creationists take heart—even if we were to
discover and translate such a organisms had arisen from a single progenitor,
the ultimate Adam, since, ex

"trademark message" in our spare DNA, or found some other uncontestable
hypothesi in these cases, Adam could have had an entirely independent twin
mark of early tampering, this would do nothing to rescind the claim of the

of sorts, accidentally sharing the same DNA language. Of course, if life
arose theory of natural selection to explain all design in nature without
invocation many more times—say, a hundred times—under these same
conditions, then of a foresighted Designer-Creator outside the system. If the
theory of the likelihood of only one of the two equiprobable languages'
appearing evolution by natural selection can account for the existence of the
people at would plummet to Vanishing. And if in fact there are many more
than two NovaGene who dreamt up DNA branding, it can also account for
the equally usable genetic codes, this would similarly change the
implications existence of any predecessors who may have left their
signatures around for about probability. But until we know more about the
range of genuine us to discover.

possibilities and their associated probabilities, we can't get any good
leverage Now that we have seen this possibility, however unlikely it is, we
also see to decide for sure that life arose just once. For the time being, it's
the simplest that, if the skeptics had ever found their Holy Grail, the You-
Couldn't-Get-hypothesis—life only has to have arisen once.

Here-from-There Organ or Organism, it would not have been conclusive
against Darwinism after all. Darwin himself said that he would have to
abandon his theory if such a phenomenon were discovered (see note 5 of
chapter 2 ), but now we can see that it would always have been log-

320 CONTROVERSIES CONTAINED

Three Losers: Teilhard, Lamarck, and Directed Mutation 321

alluded to, is testimony to the depth of loathing of Darwin's dangerous idea,
a 2. THREE LOSERS: TEILHARD, LAMARCK, AND DIRECTED

loathing so great that it will excuse any illogicality and tolerate any opacity
MUTATION

in what purports to be an argument, if its bottom line promises relief from
the oppressions of Darwinism.

Now let us go to the opposite extreme and consider a heresy that would be
What about that other notorious heresy, Lamarckism, the belief in the truly
fatal to Darwinism if it weren't such a confused and ultimately self-
inheritance of acquired characteristics?4 Here the situation is much more
contradictory alternative: the attempt by the Jesuit paleontologist Teilhard
de interesting. The main appeal of Lamarckism has always been its promise
of Chardin to reconcile his religion with his belief in evolution. He
proposed a speeding up the passage of organisms through Design Space by
taking adversion of evolution that put humanity at the center of the
universe, and vantage of the design improvements acquired by individual
organisms during discovered Christianity to be an expression of the goal
—"the Omega-their lives. So much design work to do, and so little time!
But the prospect of point"—towards which all evolution is striving. Teilhard
even made room for Lamarckism as an alternative to Darwinism can be
ruled out on logical Original Sin (in its orthodox Catholic version, not the
scientific version I grounds alone: the capacity to get Lamarckian
inheritance off the ground in noted in chapter 8). To his dismay, the Church
viewed this as heresy, and the first place presupposes a Darwinian process
(or a miracle) (Dawkins forbade him to teach it in Paris, so he spent the rest
of his days in China, 1986a, pp. 299-300). But couldn't Lamarckian
inheritance be an important studying fossils, until his death in 1955. His
book The Phenomenon of Man crane within a Darwinian framework?
Darwin himself, notoriously, included (1959) was published posthumously
and met with international acclaim, but Lamarckian inheritance as a booster
process (in addition to natural selection) the scientific establishment,
orthodox Darwinism in particular, was just as in his own version of
evolution. He could entertain this idea because he had resolute as the
Church in rejecting it as heretical. It is fair to say that in the such a foggy
sense of the mechanics of heredity. (To get a clear idea of how years since
his work was published, it has become clear to the point of unconstrained
Darwin's imagination about mechanisms of inheritance could unanimity
among scientists that Teilhard offered nothing serious in the way be, see
Desmond and Moore 1991, pp. 531ff, for an account of his bold of an
alternative to orthodoxy; the ideas that were peculiarly his were
speculations about "pangenesis." )

confused, and the rest was just bombastic redescription of orthodoxy.2 The
One of the most fundamental contributions to neo-Darwinism after Darwin
classic savaging was by Sir Peter Medawar, and is reprinted in his book of
himself was August Weismann's (1893) firm distinction between the germ
essays, Pluto's Republic (1982, p. 245). A sample sentence: "In spite of all
the line and the somatic line; the germ line consists of the sex cells in an
obstacles that Teilhard perhaps wisely puts in our way, it is possible to
organism's ovaries or gonads, and all the other cells of the body belong to
the discern a train of thought in The Phenomenon of Man"

soma. What happens to somatic-line cells during their lifetime has a
bearing, The problem with Teilhard's vision is simple. He emphatically
denied the of course, on whether that body's germ line flows into any
progeny at all, but fundamental idea: that evolution is a mindless,
purposeless, algorithmic changes to the somatic cells die with those cells;
only changes to germ-line process. This was no constructive compromise;
this was a betrayal of the cells—mutations—can carry on. This doctrine,
sometimes called central insight that had permitted Darwin to overthrow
Locke's Mind-first Weismannism, is the bulwark that orthodoxy eventually
raised against Lavision. Alfred Russel Wallace had been tempted by the
same abandonment, marckism—which Darwin himself thought he could
countenance. Might as we saw in chapter 3, but Teilhard embraced it
wholeheartedly and made it the centerpiece of his alternative vision.3 The
esteem in which Teilhard's book is still held by nonscientists, the respectful
tone in which his ideas are Teilhard's views can certainly be applauded by
some orthodox Darwinians. (Medawar demurs on this point.) But in any
event, Huxley could not buy all that Teilhard was offering. "Yet for all this
Huxley finds it impossible to follow Teilhard 'all the way in his gallant
attempt to reconcile the supernatural elements in Christianity with the facts
and 2. The rhetorical method of "bombastic redescription" of the
commonplace was first implications of evolution'. But, bless my soul, this
reconciliation is just what Teilhard's described by Paul Edwards ( 1965) in
an essay on another continental obscurantist, the book is about!" (Medawar
1982, p. 251).

theologian Paul Tillich.

4. I restrict Lamarckism to inheritance of acquired characteristics through
the genetic 3. Teilhard's book had an unlikely champion in England, Sir
Julian Huxley, one of the apparatus. If we relax the definition, then
Lamarckism is not clearly a fallacy. After all, contributors to—indeed, the
baptizer of—the modern synthesis. As Medawar makes human beings
inherit (by legacy) acquired wealth from their parents, and most animals
plain, what Huxley admired in Teilhard's book was largely its support for
the doctrine of inherit (by proximity) acquired parasites from their parents,
and some animals inherit the continuity of genetic and "psychosocial"
evolution. This is a doctrine I am myself (by succession ) acquired nests,
burrows, dens from their parents. These are all phenom-enthusiastically
supporting under the heading of the unity of Design Space, so some of ena
of biological significance, but they are not what I.amarck was getting at—
heretically.

322 C

OceanofPDF.com

Three Losers: Teilhard, Lamarck, and Directed Mutation 323

ONTROVERSIES CONTAINED

Weismannism still be overthrown? Today the odds against Lamarckism as a
often been overlooked, or even shunned, by biologists who confused it with
major crane look much more formidable (Dawkins 1986a, pp. 288-303).
For some dread Lamarckian heresy. The saving grace for the Baldwin
Effect is Lamarckism to work, the information about the acquired
characteristic in that organisms pass on their particular capacity to acquire
certain charac-question would somehow have to get from the revised body
part, the soma, to teristics, rather than any of the characteristics they
actually acquire. This does the eggs or sperm, the germ line. In general,
such message-sending is deemed have the effect of taking advantage of the
design explorations of individual impossible—no communication channels
have been discovered that could organisms, as we saw, and hence is a
powerful crane under the right carry the traffic—but set that difficulty aside.
The deeper problem lies with circumstances. It is just not Lamarck's crane.

the nature of the information in the DNA. As we have seen, our system of
Finally, what about the possibility of "directed" mutation? Ever since
embryological development takes DNA sequences as a recipe, not a
blueprint.

Darwin, orthodoxy has presupposed that all mutation is random; blind
There is no point-for-point mapping between body parts and DNA parts.
This chance makes the candidates. Mark Ridley (1985, p. 25) provides the
stan-is what makes it extremely unlikely—or in some cases impossible—
that any dard declaration:

particular acquired change in a body part (in a muscle or a beak or, in the
case of behavior, a neural control circuit of some sort) will correspond to
any Various theories of evolution by directed variation' have been proposed,
discrete change in the organism's DNA. So, even if there were a way of but
we must rule them out. There is no evidence for directed variation in getting
a change order sent to the sex cells, there would be no way of mutation, in
recombination, or in the process of Mendelian inheritance.

composing the necessary change order.

Whatever the internal plausibility of these theories, they are in fact wrong.

Consider an example. The violinist assiduously develops a magnificent
vibrato, thanks largely to adjustments built up in the tendons and ligaments
of But that is a mite too strong. The orthodox theory mustn't presuppose any
her left wrist quite different from the adjustments she simultaneously builds
process of directed mutation—that would be a skyhook for sure—but it can
up in her right wrist, the wrist of her bowing arm. The recipe for wrist-leave
open the possibility of somebody's discovering nonmiraculous mech-
making in human DNA makes both wrists from a single set of instructions
anisms that can bias the distribution of mutations in speed-up directions.

that takes advantage of mirror-image reflection (that's why your wrists are
so Eigen's ideas about quasi-species in chapter 8 are a case in point.

much alike ), so there would be no simple way to change the recipe for the
In earlier chapters, I have drawn attention to various other possible cranes
left wrist without making the same (and unwanted) change in the right
wrist.

that are currently being investigated: trans-species "plagiarism" of
nucleotide It is not hard to imagine how "in principle" the embryological
process might sequences (Houck's Drosophila), the crossovers made
possible by the be cajoled into rebuilding each wrist separately after the
initial construction innovation of sex (Holland's genetic algorithms), the
exploration of multiple takes place, but even if this problem can be
overcome, the chances are small variations by small teams (Wright's
"demes") that return to the parent indeed that this would be a practical
mutation, a localized and smallish population (Schull's "intelligent
species"), and Gould's "higher level species revision in her DNA, that
corresponds closely to the improvements her years sorting," to name four.
Since these debates all fit comfortably within the of practice have created.
So almost certainly her children will have to learn commodious walls of
contemporary Darwinism, they don't need further their vibrato the same
way she did.

scrutiny from us, fascinating though they are. Almost always, the issue in
This is not quite conclusive, however, and hypotheses that have features at
evolutionary theory is not possibility in principle, but relative importance,
least strongly reminiscent of Lamarckism keep popping up in biology and
are and the issues are always much more complex than I have portrayed
them.6

often taken seriously, in spite of the general taboo against anything
smacking There is one area of ongoing controversy, however, that deserves
a some-of Lamarckism.5 I noted in chapter 3 that the Baldwin Effect has
what fuller treatment, not because it threatens something hard or brittle in
the modern synthesis—however it comes out, Darwinism will still be stand-
5. Dawkins (1986a, p. 299) issues the right caveat: Lamarckism is
"incompatible with embryology as we know it," but "this is not to say that,
somewhere in the universe, there 6. To those who want to explore these and
other controversies more fully, 1 recommend may not be some alien system
of life in which embryology is preformationistic; a life-form the following
books as particularly clear and accessible to neophytes willing to work that
really does have a 'blueprint genetics', and that really could, therefore,
inherit ac-bard. Buss 1987, Dawkins 1982, G. Williams 1992, and, as an
invaluable handbook, Keller quired characteristics." There are other
possibilities that might be called Lamarckian as and Uoyd 1992. Mark
Ridley 1993 is an excellent textbook. For a more accessible primer, well.
For a survey, see Landman 1991, 1993; for another interesting variation on
the Calvin 1986 is a ripping good story, with enough bold speculation
thrown in to whet your appetite for more.

theme, see Dawkins' account of "A Lamarckian Scare" (Dawkins 1982, pp.
164-78).

324 CONTROVERSIES CONTAINED

Cui Bono? 325

ing strong—but because it has been seen to have particularly upsetting
presumably most of them would, if Wilson's long-held homily is true ), that
implications for the extension of evolutionary thinking to humanity. This is

would be just fine, but people were afraid that Wilson had his priorities the
debate over the "units of selection."

backwards.

This is an example of a topic of perennial and proper human concern.

Lawyers ask, in Latin, Cui bono?, a question that often strikes at the heart
of 3. Cui BONO?

important issues: Who benefits from this matter? The same issue arises in
evolutionary theory, where the counterpart of Wilson's actual dictum would

"What's good for General Motors is good for the country."

be: "What's good for the body is good for the genes and vice versa." By and
large, biologists would agree, this must be true. The fate of a body and the

—not said by Charles E. Wilson, 1953

fate of its genes are tightly linked. But they are not perfectly coincident.

What about those cases when push comes to shove, and the interests of the
In 1952, Charles E. Wilson was president of General Motors, and newly
body (long life, happiness, comfort, etc.) conflict with the interests of the
elected U.S. President Dwight Eisenhower nominated him to be his
Secretary genes?

of Defense. At his nomination hearing before the Senate Armed Services
This question was always latent in the modern synthesis. Once genes had
Committee in January 1953, Wilson was asked to sell his shares in General
been identified as the things whose differential replication was responsible
Motors, but he objected. When asked if his continued stake in General for
all the design change in the biosphere, the question was unavoidable, but
Motors mightn't unduly sway his judgment, he replied: "For years, I thought
for a long time theorists could be lulled, like Charles Wilson, with the re-
what was good for the country was good for General Motors and vice
versa."

flection that by and large what was good for the whole was good for the
part Unfortunately for him, what he actually said did not have much
replicative and vice versa. But then George Williams (1966 ) drew attention
to the ques-power—though just enough for me to locate a descendant in a
reference book tion, and people began to realize that it had profound
implications for our and reproduce it once again in the preceding sentence.
What replicated like a understanding of evolution. Dawkins made the point
unforgettable by fram-flu virus in the press reports of his testimony, on the
other hand, was the ing it in terms of the concept of the selfish gene (1976),
pointing out that mutated version used as the epigraph for this section; in
response to the from the gene's "point of view," a body was a sort of
survival machine created ensuing furor, Wilson was forced to sell his stock
in order to win the to enhance the gene's chances of continued replication.

nomination, and he was dogged by the "quotation" for the rest of his days.

The old Panglossianism had dimly thought in terms of adaptations being
We can press this frozen accident into new service. There is little doubt for
"the good of the species"; Williams, Maynard Smith, Dawkins, and others
why the mutated version of Wilson's remarks spread. Before people would
showed that "for the good of the organism" was just as myopic a
perspective approve Charles Wilson for this important decision-making
post, they wanted as "for the good of the species" had been. In order to see
this, one had to to assure themselves about who would be the principal
beneficiary of his adopt a still more undeluded perspective, the gene's
perspective, and ask decisions: the country or General Motors. Was he
going to make selfish what was good for the genes. At first it does seem
hard-boiled, coldhearted, decisions, or decisions for the benefit of the whole
body politic? His actual ruthless. It reminds me, in fact, of that hackneyed
rule of thumb made famous answer did little to reassure them. They smelled
a rat, and exposed it in the in hard-boiled mystery stories: cherchez la
femme! —look for the woman!7

mutation of his words that they disseminated. He seemed to be claiming
that The idea is that, as any tough-minded, worldly-wise detective should
know, nobody should be concerned about his decision-making, since even if
the the key that unlocks your mystery will involve some woman or other in

some principal or direct beneficiary was General Motors, it would all work
out fine way or other. Probably bad advice, even in the stylized and
unrealistic world for the whole country. A dubious claim to be sure.
Although it might be true of whodunits. Better advice, claim the gene
centrists, is cherchez le gene! We most of the time—"other things being
equal"—what about the times when saw a good example of this in the
account in chapter other things wouldn't be equal? Whose benefit would
Wilson further in those circumstances? That is what had people upset, and
rightly so. They wanted the actual decision-making by the Secretary of
Defense to be directly responsive to the national interest. If decisions
reached under those benign 7. The original or at least primary source of
"cherchez la femme!" is Alexandre Dumas's circumstances benefited
General Motors (and

(that's Dumas pere, not fils) novel Les Mohicans de Paris, in which the
inspector, M.

Jackal, enunciates the principle several times. The remark has also been
attributed to Talleyrand and others. (Thanks to Justin Leiber for the
scholarly sleuthing.) 326 CONTROVERSIES CONTAINED

Cui Bono? 327

9 of David Haig's sleuthing, but there are hundreds or thousands of others
be mere "bookkeeping" (and as unilluminating as a molecular-level box
score that could be cited. (Cronin 1991 and Matt Ridley 1993 survey the
history of of a baseball game). William Wimsatt (1980) introduced the term
this research up to the present.) Whenever you have an evolutionary puzzle,

"bookkeeping" to refer to the fact, agreed to on all sides, that the genes are
the gene's-eye perspective is apt to yield a solution in terms of some gene or
the storehouse of information on genetic change, leaving it debatable
whether other being favored for one reason or other. Insofar as adaptations
are the gene-centered view was just bookkeeping, a charge that has often
been manifestly for the good of the organism (the eagle-as-organism surely
made (e.g., by Gould 1992a). George Williams (1985, p. 4) accepts the
label benefits from its eagle-eye and eagle-wing), this is largely for the
Wilsonian but vigorously defends the importance of bookkeeping: "The

idea that reason: what's good for the genes is good for the whole organism.
But when bookkeeping has been taking place in the past is what gives the
theory of push comes to shove, what's good for the genes determines what
the future natural selection its most important kind of predictive power."
(See Buss will hold. They are, after all, the replicators whose varying
prospects in the 1987, especially pp. 174ff., for important reflections on this
self-replication competitions set the whole process of evolution in motion,
claim.)

and keep it in motion.

The claim that the gene-centrist perspective is best, or most important, is
This perspective, sometimes called gene centrism, or the gene's-eye point
not a claim about the importance of molecular biology, but about something
of view, has provoked a great deal of criticism, much of it misguided. For
more abstract: about which level does the most explanatory work under
most instance, it is often said that gene centrism is "reductionistic." So it is,
in the conditions. Philosophers of biology have paid more close attention,
and made good sense. That is, it shuns skyhooks, and insists that all lifting
in Design more substantive contributions, to the analysis of this issue than
to any other Space must be done by cranes. But as we saw in chapter 3,
sometimes people in evolutionary theory. I have just mentioned Wimsatt,
and there are others—

use "reductionism" to refer to the view that one should "reduce" all science,
to pick just some of the best, David Hull ( 1980), Elliot Sober (1981a), and
or all explanations, to some lowest level—the molecular level or the atomic
Kim Sterelny and Philip Kitcher (1988). One reason philosophers have been
or subatomic level (but probably nobody has ever espoused this variety of
attracted to the question is surely its ab-stractness and conceptual intricacy.

reductionism, for it is manifestly silly). In any event, gene centrism is
Thinking about it soon gets you into deep questions about what it is to
explain triumphantly non-reductionistic, in that sense of the term. What
could be less something, what causation is, what a level is, and so forth.
This is one of the reductionistic (in that sense of the term) than explaining
the presence of, say, brightest areas in recent philosophy of science; the
scientists have paid a particular amino-acid molecule in a particular location

in a particular body respectful attention to their philosophical colleagues,
and have had that by citing, not some other molecular-level facts, but,
rather, the fact that the attention repaid with knowledgeable and well-
communicated analyses and body in question was a female in a species that
provides prolonged care for arguments by the philosophers, to which the
scientists in turn have responded its young? The gene's-eye point of view
explains things in terms of the with discussions of their own of more than
workaday philosophical intricate interactions between long-range, large-
scale ecological facts, long-significance. It is a rich harvest, and I find it
hard to tear myself away from it term historical facts, and local, molecular-
level facts.

without giving a proper introduction to the subtleties in the issues, all the
Natural selection is not a force that "acts" at one level—for instance, the
more so because I have strongly held opinions about where the bulk of the
molecular level as opposed to the population level or organism level.
Natural wisdom lies with these controversies, but I have a different agenda
here, selection occurs because a sum of events, of all sorts and sizes, has a
which is, curiously enough, to drain the drama from them. They are
excellent particular statistically describable outcome. The blue whale teeters
on the scientific and philosophical problems, but no matter how they come
out, their brink of extinction; if it goes extinct, a particularly magnificent
and almost answers won't have the impact that some have feared. (This will
be a topic of impossible to replace set of volumes in the Library of Mendel
will cease to further discussion in chapter 16.)

have extant copies, but the factor that best explains why those characteristic
The tantalizing recursions and reflections of evolutionary explanation are
chromosomes, or collections of DNA nucleotide sequences, vanish from the
reason enough for philosophers to pay close attention to the units-of-
selection earth might be a virus that somehow directly attacked the DNA-
replicating controversy, but another reason it has attracted so much attention
is surely machinery in the whales, a stray comet landing near the pod of the
survivors the reflection with which we began this section: people feel
threatened by the at just the wrong time, or a surfeit of television publicity,
causing curious gene's-eye perspective for the same reason they felt
threatened by Charles humans to interfere catastrophically with their

breeding habits! There is Wilson's allegiance to General Motors. People
want to be in charge of their always a gene's-eye description of every
evolutionary effect, but the more own destinies; they take themselves to be
both the deciders important question is whether such a description might
often 328 CONTROVERSIES CONTAINED

Cut Bono? 329

and the principal beneficiaries of their decisions, and many are afraid that
To whose interests is the actual "decision-making" of natural selection
Darwinism, in its gene-centered version, will undercut their assurance on
that most directly responsive? It is not controversial that conflicts between
genes score. They are apt to see Dawkins' vivid picture of organisms as
mere vehicles and bodies (between genes and the phenotypic expressions of
the genotypes created to carry a gaggle of genes into future vehicles as
intellectual assault and of which they are a proper part) can arise. Moreover,
no one doubts that in battery. So one reason, I venture, why organism-level
and group-level general the body's claim to be considered the principal
beneficiary lapses as perspectives are so frequently hailed as a worthy
opponent to the gene-level soon as it has completed its procreational
mission. Once the salmon have perspective is the background thought—
never articulated— that we are fought their way upstream and successfully
spawned, they are dead meat.

organisms (and we live in groups that matter to us)—and we don't want our
They literally fall apart, because there is no evolutionary pressure in favor
of interests playing second fiddle to any others! My hunch is, in other
words, that any of the design revisions that might prevent them from falling
apart, giving we wouldn't care whether pine trees or hummingbirds were
"mere survival them nice long grandparent-retirement periods like those
many of us get to machines" for their genes if it weren't for our realization
that we bear the same enjoy. In general, the body is thus only an
instrumental, and hence relation to our genes that they bear to theirs. In the
next chapter, I want to put secondary, beneficiary of the "decisions" made
by natural selection.

that worry to rest by showing that this is really not so! Our relationship to
our This is true throughout the biosphere, revealed in a pattern with a few

genes is importantly different from the relationship of any other species to
its important variations. In many phyla, parents die before their offspring
are genes—because what We are is not just what we as a species are. This
will pull born, and their entire lives are a preparation for a single climactic
act of the plug, draining all the anxiety out of the still fascinating and
unresolved replication. Others—trees, for instance—live through many
generations of conceptual questions about how to think about the units of
selection, but before offspring, and can hence come into competition with
their own young for I turn to that task, I must make sure the threatening
aspect of the issue is made sunlight and other resources. Mammals and
birds typically invest large por-clear, and several common misconceptions
are cleared up.

tions of their energy and activity to caring for young, and hence have many
Perhaps the most misguided criticism of gene centrism is the frequently
more opportunities to "choose" between themselves and their young as
heard claim that genes simply cannot have interests (Midgley 1979, 1983,
beneficiaries of whatever course of action they take. Creatures for which
Stove 1992). This criticism, if taken seriously, would lead us to discard a
such options never come up can be designed "under the assumption"
(Mother treasury of insights, but it is flatly mistaken. Even if genes could
not act on Nature's tacit assumption) that this is simply not an issue that
needs any their interests in just the way we can act on ours, they can surely
have them, design attention at all.

in a sense that is uncontroversial and clear. If a body politic, or General
Presumably, the control system of a moth, for instance, is ruthlessly de-
Motors, can have interests, so can genes. You can do something for your
own signed to sacrifice the body for the sake of the genes, whenever a
generic and sake, or for the sake of the children, or for the sake of art, or for
the sake of recognizable opportunity to do so arises. A little fantasy: We
somehow democracy, or for the sake of... peanut butter. I find it hard to
imagine why surgically replace this standard system (a "Damn the
torpedoes, full speed anybody would want to put the well-being and further
flourishing of peanut ahead!" system ) with a body-favoring system ( a "To
hell with my genes, I'm butter above all else, but peanut butter can be put on
the pedestal just as looking out for Number One!" system). What could the

replacement ever do readily as art or the children can. One could even
decide—though it would be that wasn't just one way or another of
committing suicide or pointlessly a strange choice—that the thing one
wanted most to protect and enhance, wandering? A moth is simply not
equipped to take any advantage of oppor-even at the cost of one's own life,
was one's own genes. No sane person tunities tangential to its lifework of
reproducing itself. Life-enhancing ends would make such a decision. As
George Williams (1988, p. 403) says, "There are hard to take seriously, if it
is the short life of a moth we are considering.

is no conceivable justification for any personal concern with the interests
Birds, in contrast, may abandon a nest full of eggs when they themselves
are (long-term average proliferation ) of the genes we received in the lottery
of threatened in one way or another, and this looks more like what we often
do, meiosis and fertilization."

but the reason they can do this is that they can start another nest—if not this
But that doesn't mean that there aren't forces bent on furthering the sakes or
season, then next. They are looking out for Number One now, but only
interests of genes. In fact, until quite recently, genes were the principal
because this gives their genes a better chance of getting replicated later.

beneficiaries of all the selective forces on the planet. That is to say, there
We are different. There is a huge scope for alternative policies in human
were no forces whose principal beneficiary was anything else. There were
life, but the question then becomes: how and when does this scope get
accidents and catastrophes (lightning bolts and tidal waves), but no steady
established? There can be no doubt that many people have clearheadedly,
forces acting systematically to favor anything but genes.

well-informedly chosen to forgo the risks and pains of childbearing for the
safety and comfort of a "barren" life of other rewards. The culture may
stack

330 CONTROVERSIES CONTAINED

CuiBono? 331

CHAPTER 11: Panspermia, intergalactic gene-splicers, and multiple
origins of life on Earth are all harmless if unwelcome heretical possibilities.
Teilhard's

"Omega-point," Lamarck's genetic transmission of acquired traits, and
directed mutation (without a crane to support it) would be fatal to
Darwinism, but are safely discredited. The controversies over the units of
selection and the "genc's-eye point of view" are important issues in
contemporary evolutionary theory, but they don't have the dire implications
often seen in them, whichever way they come out.

This completes our survey of Darwinism in biology itself. Now that we are
armed with a fair and quite detailed picture of contemporary Darwinism,
we ore ready to see, in part III, what implications it has for Homo sapiens.

CHAPTER 12: The primary difference between our species and all others
is our reliance on cultural transmission of information, and hence on
cultural evolution. The unit of cultural evolution, Dawkins' meme, has a

powerful and underappreciated role to play in our analysis of the human
sphere.

FIGURE 11.1

the deck against it (with such loaded words as "barren" ), and it is true that
it is a reversal of the fundamental strategy of all life, but, still, it often
happens.

We recognize that bearing and raising offspring is just one of life's possible
projects, and by no means the most important, given our values. But where
could those values have come from? How did our control systems become
equipped with them, if not by miraculous surgery? How is it that we have
been able to establish a rival perspective that can often overpower our
genes'

interests while other species have not?8 This will be a topic for the next
chapter.

8. Dog-lovers may protest that there is good evidence of dogs' sacrificing
their lives for their human masters, putting their own prospects for
reproduction and even "personal"

longevity firmly in second place. Certainly this can happen, because dogs
have actually been bred for this very capacity to acquire such occasionally
fatal trans-species loyalties.

These are necessarily exceptional cases, however. The cartoonist Al Capp
saw the problem many years ago when he created his delightful shmoos,
white armless blobs with two rather pseudopodal feet and happy, cat-
whiskered faces. Shmoos loved people above all, and instantly sacrificed
themselves whenever appropriate, turning themselves into sumptuous roast
beef dinners (or peanut-butter sandwiches, or whatever their human
companions happened to need or desire). Shmoos, you may recall,
reproduced asexually by cloning in large numbers at the drop of a hat—a bit
of poetic license that got Capp out of the nagging problem of how shmoos,
given their proclivities, could ever have survived.

Kim Sterelny has suggested to me that shmoos exhibit the sort of features
we should look for as proof of intergalactic interlopers in our past! If we
found organisms whose adaptations were manifestly not for their own direct
benefit, but for the benefit of their putative makers, this would properly set
us wondering, but it would not be conclusive.

PART III

MIND, MEANING,

MATHEMATICS, AND

MORALITY

The new fundamental feeling: our conclusive transitoriness.— Formerly
one sought the feeling of the grandeur of man by pointing to his divine
origin, this has now become a forbidden way, for at its portal stands the
ape, together with other gruesome beasts, grinning knowingly as if to say:
no further in this direction! One therefore now tries the opposite direction:
the way mankind is going shall serve as proof of his grandeur and kinship
with God. Alas this, too, is vain! At the end of this way stands the funeral
urn of the last man and gravedigger (with the inscription 'nihil humani a me
alienum puto '). However high mankind may have evolved—and perhaps at
the end it will stand even lower than at the beginning! — it cannot pass
over into a higher order, as little as the ant and the earwig can at the end of
its 'earthly course' rise up to kinship with God and eternal life. The
becoming drags the has-been along behind it: why should an exception to
this eternal spectacle be made on behalf of some little star or for any little
species upon it! Away with such sentimentalities!

—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 1881, p. 47

CHAPTER TWELVE

The Cranes of Culture

1. THE MONKEY'S UNCLE MEETS THE MEME

What is the question now placed before society with a glib assurance the
most astounding? The question is this— Is man an ape or an angel?

My Lord, I am on the side of the angels.

—BENJAMIN DISRAELI, speech at Oxford, 1864

Darwin himself saw clearly that if he claimed that his theory applied to one
particular species, this would upset its members in ways he dreaded, so he
held back at first. There is almost no mention of our species in Origin of
Species—aside from its important role as a crane in artificial selection. But
of course this fooled no one. It was clear where the theory was heading, so
Darwin worked hard to produce his own, carefully thought-out version
before the critics and skeptics could bury the issue in misrepresentations
and alarm calls: The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex
(1871). There was no doubt at all, Darwin observed: we— Homo sapiens—
are one of the species over which evolutionary theory reigns. Seeing that
there was little hope of denying this fact, some Darwin-dreaders have
sought a champion who might deliver a pre-emptive strike, disabling the
dangerous idea before it ever got a chance to spread across the isthmus that
connects our species with all the others. Whenever they have found
someone announcing the demise of Darwinism (or neo-Darwinism, or the
modern synthesis), they have egged him on, hoping that this time the
revolution would be real. Self-styled revolutionaries have struck early and
often, but, as we have seen, they have managed only to invigorate their
target, deepening our understanding of it while enhancing it with
complexities undreamt of by Darwin himself.

Falling back, then, some of the foes of Darwin's dangerous idea have
planted themselves firmly on the isthmus, like Horatio at the bridge, intent

336 THE CRANES OF CULTURE

The Monkey's Uncle Meets the Meme 337

on preventing the idea from crossing over. The famous first confrontation
was the notorious debate in Oxford's Museum of Natural History in 1860,
only a few months after the initial publication of Origin, between "Soapy
Sam" Wilberforce, Bishop of Oxford, and Thomas Henry Huxley,
"Darwin's bulldog." This is a tale told so often in so many variations that we
might count it a phylum of memes, not just a species. Here it was that the
good bishop made his famous rhetorical mistake, asking Huxley whether it
was on his grandfather's side or his grandmother's side that he was
descended from an ape. Tempers were running high in that meeting room; a
woman had fainted, and several of Darwin's supporters were almost beside
themselves with fury at the contemptuous misrepresentation of their hero's
theory that was being given, so it is understandable that eyewitnesses'
stories diverge at this point. In the best version—which in all likelihood has

undergone some significant design improvement over the retellings—
Huxley replied that he

"was not ashamed to have a monkey for his ancestor; but he would be
ashamed to be connected with a man who used great gifts to obscure the
truth" (R. Richards 1987, p. 4; see also pp. 549-51, and Desmond and
Moore 1991, ch. 33).

And ever since, some members of Homo sapiens have been remarkably
thin-skinned about our ancestral relationship to the apes. When Jared
Diamond published The Third Chimpanzee in 1992, he drew his title from
the recently discovered fact that we human beings are actually more closely
related to the two species of chimpanzees {Pan troglodytes, the familiar
Family tree of the higher primates. Trace back each pair of modern higher
primates chimp, and Pan paniscus, the rare, smaller pygmy chimp or
bonobo ) than to the black dot connecting them. The numbers to the left
then give the percentage those chimpanzees are to the other apes. We three
species have a common difference between the DNAs of those modern
primates, while the numbers to the ancestor more recent than the common
ancestor of the chimpanzee and the right give the estimated number of
millions of years ago since they last shared a gorilla, for instance, so we are
all on one branch of the Tree of Life, with common ancestor. For example,
the common and pygmy chimps differ in about 0.7

gorillas and orangutans and everything else on other branches.

percent of the DNA and diverged around three million years ago; we differ
in 1.6

We are the third chimpanzee. Diamond cautiously lifted this fascinating
percent of our DNA from either chimp and diverged from their common
ancestor around seven million years ago, and gorillas differ in about 2.3
percent of their DNA fact from the "philological" work on primate DNA by
Sibley and Ahlquist from us or chimps and diverged from the common
ancestor leading to us and the (1984 and later papers), and made it clear to
his readers that theirs were a two chimps around ten million years ago.
[Diamond 1992]

somewhat controversial set of studies ( Diamond 1992, pp. 20, 371-72). He
FIGURE 12.1

was not cautious enough for one reviewer, however. Jonathan Marks, an
anthropologist at Yale, went into orbit in denunciation of Diamond—and
more powerful techniques). Why, though, should it make any moral dif-
Sibley and Ahlquist, whose work, he declared, "needs to be treated like
ference whether we or the gorillas win the competition to be the closest
nuclear waste: bury it safely and forget about it for a million years" (Marks
cousin of the chimpanzee? The apes are our closest kin in any case. But it
1993a, p. 61). Since 1988, Marks, whose own earlier investigations of pri-
matters mightily to Marks, apparently, whose desire to discredit Sibley and
mate chromosomes had placed the chimpanzee marginally closer to the
Ahlquist has driven him right out of bounds. His most recent attack on
them, gorilla than to us, has waged a startlingly vituperative campaign
condemning in a review of some other books in American Scientist ( Marks
1993b), drew Sibley and Ahlquist, but this campaign has recently suffered a
major setback.

a chorus of condemnation from his fellow scientists, and a remarkable apol-
The original findings of Sibley and Ahlquist have been roundly confirmed
by ogy from the editors of that magazine: "Although reviewers' opinions are
more sensitive methods of analysis (theirs was a relatively crude technique,
their own and not the magazine's, the editors do set standards that we
deeply path-finding at the time, but subsequently superseded by regret were
not maintained in the review in question" (Sept.-Oct.

338 THE CRANES OF CULTURE

The Monkey's Uncle Meets the Meme 339

1993, p. 407). Like Bishop Wilberforce before him, Jonathan Marks got
never forget that there is no inertia at all in selection pressure. Pressures that
carried away.

have been dominant for millions of years can vanish overnight; and, of
People ache to believe that we human beings are vastly different from all
course, new selection pressures can come into existence with a single other

species—and they are right! We are different. We are the only species
volcanic eruption, or the appearance of a new disease organism.

that has an extra medium of design preservation and design
communication: Cultural evolution operates many orders of magnitude
faster than genetic culture. That is an overstatement; other species have
rudiments of culture as evolution, and this is part of its role in making our
species special, but it has well, and their capacity to transmit information
"behaviorally" in addition to also turned us into creatures with an entirely
different outlook on life from genetically is itself an important biological
phenomenon (Bonner 1980 ), but that of any other species. In fact, it isn't
clear that the members of any other these other species have not developed
culture to the takeoff point the way species have an outlook on life. But we
do; we can choose celibacy for our species has. We have language, the
primary medium of culture, and reasons; we can pass laws regulating what
we eat; we can have elaborate language has opened up new regions of
Design Space that only we are privy systems for encouraging or punishing
certain sorts of sexual behavior, and so to. In a few short millennia—a mere
instant in biological time—we have forth. Our outlook on life is so
compelling and obvious to us that we often already used our new
exploration vehicles to transform not only our planet fall in the trap of
imposing it willy-nilly on other creatures—or on all of but the very process
of design development that created us.

nature. One of my favorite examples of this widespread cognitive illusion is
Human culture, as we have already seen, is not just a crane composed of the
puzzlement researchers have expressed about the evolutionary ex-cranes,
but a crane-making crane. Culture is such a powerful set of cranes planation
of sleep.

that its effects can swamp many—but not all—of the earlier genetic
pressures Lab shelves sag beneath volumes of data, yet no one has
discerned that and processes that created it and still coexist with it. We often
make the sleep has any clear biological function. Then what evolutionary
pressure mistake of confusing a cultural innovation with a genetic
innovation. For selected this curious behavior that forces us to spend a third
of our lives instance, everybody knows that the average height of human

beings has unconscious? Sleeping animals are more vulnerable to predators.
They skyrocketed in the last few centuries. (When we visit such relics of
recent have less time to search for food, to eat, to find mates, to procreate,
to feed history as Old Ironsides, the early-nineteenth-century warship in
Boston their young. As Victorian parents told their children, sleepy-heads
fall be-Harbor, we find the space below decks to be comically cramped—
were our hind—in life and evolution.

ancestors really a race of midgets?) How much of this rapid change in
height University of Chicago sleep researcher Allan Rechtshaffen asks
"how is due to genetic changes in our species? Not much, if any at all.
There has could natural selection with its irrevocable logic have 'permitted'
the an-been time for only about ten generations of Homo sapiens since Old
Iron-imal kingdom to pay the price of sleep for no good reason?" Sleep is
so sides was launched in 1797, and even if there were a strong selection
pressure apparently maladaptive that it is hard to understand why some
other con-favoring the tall—and is there evidence for that?—this would not
have had dition did not evolve to satisfy whatever need it is mat sleep
satisfies.

time to produce such a big effect. What have changed dramatically are
human

[Raymo 1988.]

health, diet, and living conditions; these are what have produced the
dramatic change in phenotype, which is 100 percent due to cultural
innovations, passed But why does sleep need a "clear biological function" at
all? It is being on through cultural transmission: schooling, the spread of
new farming awake that needs an explanation, and presumably its
explanation is obvious.

practices, public-health measures, and so forth. Anyone who worries about
Animals—unlike plants—need to be awake at least part of the time, in order

"genetic determinism" should be reminded that virtually all the differences
to search for food and procreate, as Raymo notes. But once you've headed
discernible between the people of, say, Plato's day and the people living

down this path of leading an active existence, the cost-benefit analysis of
the today—their physical talents, proclivities, attitudes, prospects—must be
due options that arise is far from obvious. Being awake is relatively costly,
to cultural changes, since fewer than two hundred generations separate us
compared with lying dormant (think of its root, dormire). So presumably
from Plato. Environmental changes due to cultural innovations change the
Mother Nature economizes where she can. If we could get away with it,
we'd landscape of phenotypic expression so much, and so fast, however,
that they

"sleep" our entire lives. That is what trees do, after all: all winter they can in
principle change the genetic selection pressures rapidly—the Baldwin

"hibernate" in deep coma, because there is nothing else for them to do, and
in Effect is a simple instance of such a change in selection pressure due to
the summer they "estivate" in a somewhat lighter coma, in what the doctors
widespread behavioral innovation. Although it is important to remember
how call a vegetative state when a member of our species has the
misfortune to slowly evolution works in general, we should

enter it. If the woodchopper comes along while the tree 340 THE CRANES
OF CULTURE

The Monkey's Uncle Meets the Meme 341

is sleeping, well, that's just the chance that trees have to take, all the time.

Then a few billion years passed, while multicellular life forms explored But
surely we animals are at greater risk from predators while we sleep? Not
various nooks and crannies of Design Space until, one fine day, another
necessarily. Leaving the den is risky, too, and if we're going to minimize
that invasion began, in a single species of multicellular organism, a sort of
pri-risky phase, we might as well keep the metabolism idling while we bide
our mate, which had developed a variety of structures and capacities (don't
you time, conserving energy for the main business of replicating. (These
matters dare call them preadaptations) that just happened to be particularly
well are much more complicated than I am portraying them, of course. My
point suited for these invaders. It is not surprising that the invaders were

well is just that the cost-benefit analysis is far from obvious, and that is
enough to adapted for finding homes in their hosts, since they were
themselves created remove the air of paradox.)

by their hosts, in much the way spiders create webs and birds create nests.
In We think that being up and about, having adventures and completing a
twinkling—less than a hundred thousand years—these new invaders
projects, seeing our friends and learning about the world, is the whole point
transformed the apes who were their unwitting hosts into something of life,
but Mother Nature doesn't see it that way at all. A life of sleep is as
altogether new: witting hosts, who, thanks to their huge stock of newfangled
good a life as any other, and in many regards better—certainly cheaper—

invaders, could imagine the heretofore unimaginable, leaping through
Design than most. If the members of some other species also seem to enjoy
their Space as nothing had ever done before. Following Dawkins ( 1976), I
call the periods of wakefulness as much as we do, this is an interesting
commonality, invaders memes, and the radically new kind of entity created
when a so interesting that we should not make the mistake of assuming it
must exist particular sort of animal is properly furnished by—or infested
with— memes just because we find it to be such an appropriate attitude
towards life in our is what is commonly called a person.

own case. Its existence in other species needs to be shown, and that is not
That is the story in rough outline. Some people, I have found, just hate the
easy.1

whole idea. They like the idea that it is our human minds and human culture
What we are is very much a matter of what culture has made us. Now we
that distinguish us sharply from all the "thoughtless brutes" (as Descartes
must ask how this all got started. What sort of evolutionary revolution
called them ), but they don't like the idea of trying to give an evolutionary
happened that set us apart so decisively from all the other products of
genetic explanation of the creation of this most important distinguishing
mark. I revolution? The story I am going to tell is a retelling of the story we
think they are making a big mistake.2 Do they want a miracle? Do they
want encountered in chapter 4, about the creation of the eukaryotic cells
that made culture to be God-given? A skyhook, not a crane? Why? They

want the multicellular life possible. You will recall that before there were
cells with human way of life to be radically different from the way of life of
all other nuclei there were simpler, and more solitary, life forms, the
prokary-otes, living things, and so it is, but, like life itself, and every other
wonderful thing, destined for nothing fancier than drifting around in an
energy-rich soup culture must have a Darwinian origin. It, too, must grow
out of something reproducing themselves. Not nothing, but not much of a
life. Then, one day, less, something quasi-, something merely as if rather
than intrinsic, and at according to Lynn Margulis' wonderful story (1981),
some prokaryotes were every step along the way the results have to be, as
David Haig puts it, invaded by parasites of sorts, and this turned out to be a
blessing in disguise, evolutionarily enforceable. For culture we need
language, for instance, but for, whereas parasites are—by definition—
deleterious to the fitness of their language has to evolve on its own hook
first; we can't just notice how good it hosts, these invaders turned out to be
beneficial, and hence were symbionts would be once it was all in place. We
can't presuppose cooperation; we can't but not parasites. They and those
they invaded became more like presuppose human intelligence; we can't
presuppose tradition— this all has to commensals—literally, from the Latin,
organisms that feed at the same be built up from scratch, just the way the
original replicators were. Settling table—or mutualists, benefiting from
each other's company. They joined for anything less in the way of an
explanation would be just giving up.

forces, creating a revolutionary new kind of entity, a eukaryotic cell. This In
the next chapter, I will address the important theoretical questions opened
up the Vast space of possibilities we know as multicellular life, a space
previously unimaginable, to say the least; prokaryotes are no doubt clueless
on all topics.

2. It has been made before, by no less stalwart a Darwinian than Thomas
Henry Huxley, in his Romanes Lecture of 1893 in Oxford. "Huxley's critics
... noted the apparent bifurcation he had introduced into nature, between
natural processes and human activity, 1. See the discussion of fun in
Dennett 1991a. Some human beings claim to love to sleep.

as if man could somehow lift himself out of nature" (Richards 1987, p.
316). Huxley

"What do you plan to do this weekend?" "Sleep! Ahh, it will be wonderful!"
Other human quickly saw his error and attempted to restore a Darwinian
account of culture—by an beings find this attitude well-nigh
incomprehensible. Mother Nature sees nothing strange appeal to the force
of group selection! History does have a way of repeating itself.

about either attitude, under the right conditions.

342 THE CRANES OF CULTURE

Invasion of the Body-Snatchers 343

about how language and the human mind could evolve in the first place by
in a Mandel Lecture to the American Society for Aesthetics, a lecture series
Darwinian mechanisms. I will have to confront and disarm the tremendous
—

endowed for the purpose of exploring the question whether art promotes
and largely misguided—animosity to this story, and also work out answers
to human evolution. (The answer is Yes!) I then exapted my own device, the
responsible objections to it. But before we consider how this magnificent
reusing it, with modifications, in my book on human consciousness (1991a,
crane-structure might have been built, I want to sketch the completed pp.
199-208), to show how memes could transform the operating system or
product, distinguishing it from its caricatures, and showing in a little more
computational architecture of a human brain. That account offers many
detail how culture comes to have such revolutionary powers.

details about the relationship between the genetically designed hardware of
the human brain and the culturally transmitted habits that transform it into
something much more powerful, and I will skip lightly over most of those
2. I

details here. This time I will modify my exaptation of Dawkins a second
NVASION OF THE BODY-SNATCHERS

time, the better to deal with the particular environmental problems
encountered in the current explanatory project. (Those who are familiar
with Human beings owe their biological supremacy to the possession of a
either of its immediate ancestors should find important improvements in the
form of inheritance quite unlike that of other animals: exogenetic or current
version.)

exosomatic heredity. In this form of heredity information is transmitted The
outlines of the theory of evolution by natural selection make clear that from
one generation to the next through nongenetic channels— by word
evolution occurs whenever the following conditions exist: of mouth, by
example, and by other forms of indoctrination; in general, by the entire
apparatus of culture.

(1) variation: there is a continuing abundance of different elements

—PETER MEDAWAR 1977, p. 14

(2) heredity or replication: the elements have the capacity to create copies
or replicas of themselves

The nucleic acids invented human beings in order to be able to repro-

(3) differential "fitness": the number of copies of an element that are duce
themselves even on the Moon.

created in a given time varies, depending on interactions between the

—SOL SPIEGELMAN, quoted in Eigen 1992, p. 124

features of that element and features of the environment in which it persists

I am convinced that comparisons between biological evolution and human
cultural or technological change have done vastly more harm Notice that
this definition, though drawn from biology, says nothing spe-than good—
and examples abound of this most common of intellectual cific about
organic molecules, nutrition, or even life. This maximally abstract traps—
Biological evolution is powered by natural selection, cultural definition of

evolution by natural selection has been formulated in many evolution by a
different set of principles that I understand but dimly.

roughly equivalent versions—see, e.g., Lewontin 1980 and Brandon 1978

—STEPHEN JAY GOULD 1991a, p. 63

(both reprinted in Sober 1984b). As Dawkins has pointed out, the
fundamental principle is

Nobody wants to reinvent the wheel, a mythic example of wasted design
work, and I have no intention of making that error here. Up till now I have
that all life evolves by the differential survival of replicating entities....

The gene, the DNA molecule, happens to be the replicating entity which
been helping myself to Dawkins' term "meme" as the name for any item of
prevails on our own planet. There may be others. If there are, provided
cultural evolution, postponing the discussion of what kind of Darwinian
certain other conditions are met, they will almost inevitably tend to be-
theory of memes we might be able to devise. The time has come to consider
come the basis for an evolutionary process.

more carefully what Dawkins' memes are or might be. He has done much of
But do we have to go to distant worlds to find other kinds of replication the
basic design work (drawing on the work of others, of course), and I and
other, consequent, kinds of evolution? I think that a new kind of myself
have drawn on his meme meme before, devoting considerable time
replicator has recently emerged on this very planet. It is staring us in the
and effort to building suitable explanation vehicles out of it. I am going to
face. It is still in its infancy, still drifting clumsily about in its primeval
soup, reuse these earlier constructions, adding further design modifications.
I first but already it is achieving evolutionary change at a rate which leaves
the presented my own version ( Dennett 1990c) of Dawkins' account of
memes old gene panting far behind. [Dawkins 1976, p. 206.) 344 THE
CRANES OF CULTURE

Invasion of the Body-Snatchers 345

Examples of memes are tunes, ideas, catch-phrases, clothes fashions, These
new replicators are, roughly, ideas. Not the "simple ideas" of Locke ways of
making pots or of building arches. Just as genes propagate them-and Hume
(the idea of red, or the idea of round or hot or cold ), but the sort selves in
the gene pool by leaping from body to body via sperm or eggs, so of
complex ideas that form themselves into distinct memorable units— such
memes propagate themselves in the meme pool by leaping from brain to as
the ideas of

brain via a process which, in the broad sense, can be called imitation. If a
arch

scientist hears, or reads about, a good idea, he passes it on to his colleagues
wheel

and students. He mentions it in his articles and his lectures. If the idea
catches on, it can be said to propagate itself, spreading from brain to brain.

wearing clothes

[Dawkins 1976, p. 206.]

vendetta

right triangle

alphabet

Meme evolution is not just analogous to biological or genie evolution,
calendar

according to Dawkins. It is not just a process that can be metaphorically the
Odyssey

described in these evolutionary idioms, but a phenomenon that obeys the
calculus

laws of natural selection quite exactly. The theory of evolution by natural
chess

selection is neutral, he suggests, regarding the differences between memes
perspective drawing

and genes; these are just different kinds of replicators evolving in different
evolution by natural selection

media at different rates. And just as the genes for animals could not come
impressionism

into existence on this planet until the evolution of plants had paved the way

"Greensleeves"

(creating the oxygen-rich atmosphere and ready supply of convertible nu-
deconstructionism

trients ), so the evolution of memes could not get started until the evolution
of animals had paved the way by creating a species— Homo sapiens—with
Intuitively, we see these as more or less identifiable cultural units, but we
brains that could provide shelter, and habits of communication that could
can say something more precise about how we draw the boundaries—about
provide transmission media, for memes.

why D-F#-A isn't a unit, and the theme from the slow movement of Beetho-
There is no denying that there is cultural evolution, in the Darwin-neutral
ven's Seventh Symphony is: the units are the smallest elements that
replicate sense that cultures change over time, accumulating and losing
features, while themselves with reliability and fecundity. We can compare
them, in this also maintaining features from earlier ages. The history of the
idea of, say, regard, to genes and their components: C-G-A, a single codon
of DNA, is crucifixion, or of a dome on squinches, or powered flight, is
undeniably a

"too small" to be a gene. It is one of the codes for the amino acid arginine,
history of transmission through various nongenetic media of a family of and
it copies itself prodigiously wherever it appears in genomes, but its
variations on a central theme. But whether such evolution is weakly or
effects are not "individual" enough to count as a gene. A three-nucleotide

strongly analogous to, or parallel to, genetic evolution, the process that
phrase does not count as a gene for the same reason that you can't copyright
a Darwinian theory explains so well, is an open question. In fact, it is many
three-note musical phrase: it is not enough to make a melody. But there is
no open questions. At one extreme, we may imagine, it could turn out that

"principled" lower limit on the length of a sequence that might come to be
cultural evolution recapitulates all the features of genetic evolution: not
only considered a gene or a meme (Dawkins 1982, pp. 89ff )• The first four
notes are there gene analogues (memes), but there are strict analogues of of
Beethoven's Fifth Symphony are clearly a meme, replicating all by
phenotypes, genotypes, sexual reproduction, sexual selection, DNA, RNA,
themselves, detached from the rest of the symphony, but keeping intact a
codons, allopatric speciation, demes, genomic imprinting, and so forth—the
certain identity of effect (a phenotypic effect), and hence thriving in
contexts whole edifice of biological theory perfectly mirrored in the
medium of in which Beethoven and his works are unknown. Dawkins
explains how he culture. You thought DNA-splicing was a scary
technology? Wait till they coined the name he gave these units:

start making meme implants in their laboratories! Not likely. At the other
extreme, cultural evolution could be discovered to operate according to

... a unit of cultural transmission, or a unit of imitation. 'Mimeme' comes
entirely different principles ( as Gould suggests ), so that there was no help
at from a suitable Greek root, but I want a monosyllable that sounds a bit
like all to be found amid the concepts of biology. This is surely what many

'gene'....It could alternatively be thought of as being related to 'memory'

humanists and social scientists fervently hope—but it is also highly
unlikely, or to the French word meme ___

346 THE CRANES OF CULTURE

Invasion of the BodySnatchers 347

for reasons we have already seen. In between the extremes lie the likely and
Mozart is in good company. Rare is the novelist who doesn't claim char-
valuable prospects, that there is a large (or largish) and important (or merely
acters who "take on a life of their own"; artists are rather fond of confessing
mildly interesting ) transfer of concepts from biology to the human
sciences.

that their paintings take over and paint themselves; and poets humbly
submit It might be, for example, that, although the processes of cultural
transmission that they are the servants or even slaves to the ideas that teem
in their heads, of ideas are truly Darwinian phenomena, for various reasons
they resist being not the bosses. And we all can cite cases of memes that
persist unbidden and captured in a Darwinian science, so we will have to
settle for the "merely unappreciated in our own minds, or that spread—like
rumors—in spite of the philosophical" realizations we can glean from this,
and leave science to general disapproval of that spreading by those who
help spread them.

tackle other projects.

The other day, I was embarrassed—dismayed—to catch myself walking
First let's consider the case for the claim that the phenomena of cultural
along humming a melody to myself. It was not a theme of Haydn or Brahms
evolution are truly Darwinian. Then we can turn to the skeptical compli-or
Charlie Parker or even Bob Dylan: I was energetically humming "It Takes
cations. At the outset, the meme perspective is distinctly unsettling, even
Two to Tango"—a perfectly dismal and entirely unredeemed bit of chewing
appalling. We can sum it up with a slogan:

gum for the ears that was unaccountably popular sometime in the 1950s. I
am sure I have never in my life chosen this melody, esteemed this melody,
or in A scholar is just a library's way of making another library.

any way judged it to be better than silence, but there it was, a horrible
musical virus, at least as robust in my meme pool as any melody I actually I
don't know about you, but I am not initially attracted by the idea of my
esteem. And now, to make matters worse, I have resurrected the virus in
brain as a sort of dungheap in which the larvae of other people's ideas

renew many of you, who will no doubt curse me in days to come when you
find themselves, before sending out copies of themselves in an
informational yourself humming, for the first time in over thirty years, that
boring tune.

diaspora. It does seem to rob my mind of its importance as both author and
Human language, first spoken and then, very recently, written, is surely the
critic. Who's in charge, according to this vision—we or our memes?

principal medium of cultural transmission, creating the infosphere in which
There is no simple answer to that important question. There could not be.

cultural evolution occurs. Speaking and hearing, writing and reading—these
We would like to think of ourselves as godlike creators of ideas, manip-are
the underlying technologies of transmission and replication most ulating
and controlling them as our whim dictates, and judging them from an
analogous to the technologies of DNA and RNA in the biosphere. I needn't
independent, Olympian standpoint. But even if this is our ideal, we know
that bother reviewing the familiar facts about the recent explosive
proliferation of it is seldom if ever the reality, even with the most masterful
and creative these media via the memes for movable type, radio and
television, minds. As Mozart famously observed of his own brainchildren:
xerography, computers, fax machines, and electronic mail. We are all well
aware that today we live awash in a sea of paper-borne memes, breathing in
When I feel well and in a good humor, or when I am taking a drive or an
atmosphere of electronically-borne memes. Memes now spread around the
walking after a good meal, or in the night when I cannot sleep, thoughts
world at the speed of light, and replicate at rates that make even fruit flies
crowd into my mind as easily as you would wish. Whence and how do they
and yeast cells look glacial in comparison. They leap promiscuously from
come? I do not know and / have nothing to do with it [emphasis added].

vehicle to vehicle, and from medium to medium, and are proving to be
Those which please me I keep in my head and hum them; at least others
virtually unquarantinable.

have told me that I do so.3

Genes are invisible; they are carried by gene vehicles (organisms) in which
they tend to produce characteristic effects (phenotypic effects) by which
their fates are, in the long run, determined. Memes are also invisible, and
are carried by meme vehicles—pictures, books, sayings (in particular
languages, oral or written, on paper or magnetically encoded, etc.). Tools 3.
Peter Kivy informed me after the Mandel Lecture that this oft-quoted
passage is counterfeit—not Mozart at all. I found it in Jacques Hadamard's
classic study, The Psychology of Inventing in the Mathematical Field (
1949, p. 16), and first quoted it myself overheard a guide at the
Metropolitan Museum of Art, commenting on the Gilbert Stuart in Dennett
1975, one of my first forays into Darwinian thinking. I persist in quoting it
portrait of George Washington: "This may not be what George Washington
looked like here, in spite of Kivy's correction, because it not only expresses
but exemplifies the thesis then, but this is what he looks like now." That
experience of mine, of course, illustrates that memes, once they exist, are
independent of authors and critics alike. Historical another of my themes:
the role of serendipity in all design work.

accuracy is important ( which is why 1 have written this footnote ), but the
passage so well suits my purposes that 1 am choosing to ignore its pedigree.
I might not have persisted in this, had I not encountered a supporting meme
the day after Kivy informed me: I 348 THE CRANES OF CULTURE

Invasion of the Body-Snatchers 349

and buildings and other inventions are also metnc vehicles (Campbell
1979).

appear into landfills and incinerators every day? The day may come when
A wagon with spoked wheels carries not only grain or freight from place to
nonhuman meme-evaluators suffice to select and arrange for the
preservation place; it carries the brilliant idea of a wagon with spoked
wheels from mind of particular memes, but for the time being, memes still
depend at least to mind. A meme's existence depends on a physical
embodiment in some indirectly on one or more of their vehicles' spending at
least a brief, pupal medium; if all such physical embodiments are destroyed,
that meme is stage in a remarkable sort of meme nest: a human mind.

extinguished. It may, of course, make a subsequent, independent reap-
Minds are in limited supply, and each mind has a limited capacity for
pearance, just as dinosaur genes could, in principle, get together again in
memes, and hence there is a considerable competition among memes for
some distant future, but the dinosaurs they created and inhabited would not
entrv into as many minds as possible. This competition is the major
selective be descendants of the original dinosaurs—or at least not any more
directly force in the infosphere, and, just as in the biosphere, the challenge
has been than we are. The fate of memes is similarly determined by whether
copies met with great ingenuity. "Whose ingenuity?" you may want to ask,
but by and copies of copies of them persist and multiply, and this depends
on the now you should know that this is not always a good question; the
ingenuity selective forces that act directly on the various physical vehicles
that embody is there to appreciate, whatever its source. Like a mindless
virus, a meme's them.

prospects depend on its design—not its "internal" design, whatever that
Memes, like genes, are potentially immortal, but, like genes, they depend
might be, but the design it shows the world, its phenotype, the way it affects
on the existence of a continuous chain of physical vehicles, persisting in the
things in its environment. The things in its environment are minds and other
face of the Second Law of Thermodynamics. Books are relatively
permanent, memes.

and inscriptions on monuments even more permanent, but unless these are
For instance, whatever virtues (from our perspective) the following memes
under the protection of human conservators, they tend to dissolve in time.

have, they have in common the property of having phenotypic expressions
Manfred Eigen makes the same point about genes, though driving the anal-
that tend to make their own replication more likely by disabling or pre-ogy
in the other direction:

empting the environmental forces that would tend to extinguish them: the
meme for faith, which discourages the exercise of the sort of critical
Consider, for instance, one of Mozart's compositions, one that is retained
judgment that might decide that the idea of faith was, all things considered,
a stably in our concert repertoire. The reason for its retention is not that the

dangerous idea (Dawkins 1976, p. 212); the memes for tolerance, or free
notes of this work are printed in a particularly durable ink. The persistence
speech; the meme for including a warning in a chain letter about the
terrible with which a Mozart symphony reappears in our concert
programmes is fates of those who have broken the chain in the past; the
conspiracy-theory solely a consequence of its high selection value. In order
for this to retain meme, which has a built-in response to the objection that
there is no good its effect, the work must be played again and again, the
public must take evidence of the conspiracy: "Of course not—that's how
powerful the note of it, and it must be continually re-evaluated in
competition with conspiracy is!" Some of these memes are "good," and
others "bad"; what other compositions. Stability of genetic information has
similar causes.

they have in common is a phenotypic effect that systematically tends to

[Eigen 1992, p. 15.]

disable the selective forces arrayed against them. Other things being equal,
memetics predicts that conspiracy-theory memes will persist quite As with
genes, immortality is more a matter of replication than of the independently
of their truth, and the meme for faith is apt to secure its own longevity of
individual vehicles. As we saw in note 4 of chapter 6, the survival, and that
of the religious memes that ride piggyback on it, in even preservation of the
Platonic memes, via a series of copies of copies, is a the most rationalistic
environments. Indeed, the meme for faith exhibits particularly striking case
of this. Although a few papyrus fragments of Plato's frequency-dependent
fitness: it flourishes particularly in the company of texts roughly
contemporaneous with the man himself still exist, the survival rationalistic
memes. In a skeptic-poor world, the meme for faith does not of his memes
owes almost nothing to the chemical stability of these frag-attract much
attention, and hence tends to go dormant in minds, and hence is ments.
Today's libraries contain thousands if not millions of physical copies
seldom reintroduced into the infosphere. (Can we demonstrate classic (and
translations) of Plato's Republic, and the key ancestors in the trans-predator-
prey population boom-and-bust cycles between memes for faith and
mission of this text turned to dust centuries ago.

memes for reason? Probably not, but it might be instructive to look, and ask
Brute physical replication of vehicles is not enough to ensure meme why
not.)

longevity. A few thousand hardbound copies of a new book can disappear
Other concepts from population genetics transfer quite smoothly. Here is a
with scarcely a trace in a few years, and who knows how many brilliant
case of what a geneticist would call linked loci; two memes that happen to
be letters to the editor, reproduced in hundreds of thousands of copies, dis-
physically tied together so that they tend always to replicate together, 350
THE CRANES OF CULTURE

ln vasion of the Body-Snatchers 3 51

a tendency that affects their chances. There is a magnificent ceremonial
viduals and libraries. But imagine what would happen if poets could put
their march, familiar to many of us, and generally beloved. It is stirring and
bright poems on an international network, where anybody could read them
or copy and grand—just the thing, you would think, to use for
commencements, them for a penny, electronically transferred to the poet's
royalty account. This weddings, and other festive occasions, perhaps
driving "Pomp and Circum-could provide a steady source of income for
many poets, he surmised. Quite stance" and the Wedding March from
Lohengrin to near-extinction, were it independently of any aesthetic
objections poets and poetry-lovers might have not for the fact that its
musical meme is too tightly linked to its title meme, to poems embodied in
electronic media, the obvious counterhypothesis arises which we all tend to
think of as soon as we hear the music: Sir Arthur from population
memetics. If such a network were established, no poetry-Sullivan's unusable
masterpiece, "Behold the Lord High Executioner." If this lover would be
willing to wade through thousands of electronic files filled march had no
lyrics and were titled, say, "Koko's March," it would not be with doggerel,
looking for the good poems; there would be a niche created for disqualified
from use. But the actual title, comprising the first five words of various
memes for poetry filters. One could subscribe, for a few pennies, to the
lyrics, which are tightly locked to the melody, virtually guarantees a an
editorial service that scanned the infosphere for good poems. Different

chain of thought in most listeners that would be undesirable on almost any
services, with different critical standards, would flourish, as would services
festive occasion. This is the phenotypic effect that prevents the greater for
reviewing all the different services— and services that screened, replication
of this meme. If performances of The Mikado waned over the collected,
formatted, and presented the works of the best poets in slender years, so that
a time came when few if any people knew the lyrics of the electronic
volumes which only a few would purchase. In other words, the march, let
alone the silly story, the march might come back into its own as a memes
for editing and criticism will find niches in any environment in the piece of
ceremonial music without words—except for the darn title at the
infosphere; they flourish because of the short supply and limited capacity of
head of the score! It wouldn't look good on the program, would it, just
before minds, whatever the transmission media between minds. Do you
doubt this the Vice-Chancellor's address to the graduates?

prediction? If so, I'd like to discuss framing a suitable wager with you. Here
This is actually just a vivid case of one of the most important phenomena
once again, as we have seen so often in evolutionary thinking, explanation
in the infosphere: the misfiltering of memes due to such linkages. There is
proceeds by an assumption that the processes—whatever their media, and
even a meme that names the phenomenon: throwing out the baby with the
whatever the contingent zigs and zags of their particular trajectories—will
bathwater. This book is largely intended to undo the unfortunate effects of
home in on the forced moves and other Good Tricks in the relevant space.

misfiltering the Darwinian memes, a process that has been going on ever
The structure of filters is complex and quick to respond to new challenges,
since Darwin himself got confused about which were his best ideas (even
but of course it doesn't always "work." The competition among memes to
though some of his enemies agreed with them ) and which were his worst (

break through the filters leads to an "arms race" of ploy and counterploy,
even though they seemed to perform yeoman service against certain per-
with ever more elaborate "advertising" raised against ever more layers of
nicious doctrines). (R. Richards 1987 provides a particularly fascinating
selective filters. In the dignified ecology of academia, we don't call it

history of the evolution of the ideas of evolution.) We all have filters of the
advertising, but the same arms race is manifested in department letterheads,
following sort:

"blind refereeing," the proliferation of specialized journals, book reviews,
reviews of book reviews, and anthologies of "classic works." These filters
are Ignore everything that appears in X.

not even always intended to preserve the best. Philosophers might care to
ask themselves, for instance, how often they are accomplices in increasing
the For some people, X is the National Geographic or Pravda; for others, it
is audience for a second-rate article simply because their introductory
course The New York Review of Books; we all take our chances, counting on
the needs a simple-minded version of a bad idea that even the freshmen can

"good" ideas to make it eventually through the stacks of filters of others
into refute. Some of the most frequently reprinted articles in twentieth-
century the limelight of our attention.

philosophy are famous precisely because nobody believes them; everybody
This structure of filters is itself a meme construction of considerable can see
what is wrong with them.

robustness. John McCarthy, one of the founders of Artificial Intelligence (

and the coiner of its name, a meme with its own, independent base in the
infosphere) once suggested to a humanist audience that electronic-mail 4.
The confirmation of this claim is left as an exercise for the reader. Among
the memes networks could revolutionize the ecology of the poet. Only a
handful of poets that structure the infosphere and hence affect the
transmission of other memes are the can make their living by selling their
poems, McCarthy noted, because poetry laws of libel.

books are slender, expensive volumes purchased by very few indi-352 THE
CRANES OF CULTURE

Could There Be a Science of Memetics? 353

A related phenomenon in the competition of memes for our attention is ber
the story near the end of chapter 4 about Francis Crick's jaundiced view
positive feedback. In biology, this is manifested in such phenomena as the
of population genetics as science? If population genetics just barely
qualifies

"runaway sexual selection" that explains the long and cumbersome tail of
the as science—and obsolete science at that—what chance is there for a true
bird of paradise or the peacock (for the details, see Dawkins 1986a, pp.
195-science of memetics? Philosophers, some will say, may appreciate the
(ap-220; Cronin 1991; Matt Ridley 1993). Dawkins (1986a, p. 219)
provides an parent) insight to be found in a striking new perspective, but if
you can't turn example from the world of publishing: "Best-seller lists of
books are published it into actual science, with testable hypotheses, reliable
formalizations, and weekly, and it is undoubtedly true that as soon as a book
sells enough copies quantifiable results, what good is it, really? Dawkins
himself has never to appear in one of these lists, its sales increase even
more, simply by virtue claimed to be founding a new scientific discipline of
memetics. Is this of that fact. Publishers speak of a book 'taking off', and
those publishers with because there is something wrong with the concept of
a meme?

some knowledge of science even speak of a 'critical mass for take-off'."

What stands to a meme as DNA stands to a gene? Several commentators
Meme vehicles inhabit our world alongside all the fauna and flora, large
(see, e.g., Delius 1991) have argued for the identification of memes with
and small. By and large they are "visible" only to the human species, how-
complex brain-structures, parallel to the identification of genes with
complex ever. Consider the environment of the average New York City
pigeon, whose structures of DNA. But as we have already seen, it is a
mistake to identify eyes and ears are assaulted every day by approximately
as many words, genes with their vehicles in DNA. The idea that evolution is
an algorithmic pictures, and other signs and symbols as assault each human
New Yorker.

process is the idea that it must have a useful description in substrate-neutral
These physical meme vehicles may impinge importantly on the pigeon's

terms. As George Williams proposed many years ago (1966, p. 25): "In
welfare, but not by virtue of the memes they carry—it means nothing to the
evolutionary theory, a gene could be defined as any hereditary information
pigeon that it is under a page of The National Enquirer, not The New York

[emphasis added] for which there is favorable or unfavorable selection bias
Times, that it finds a crumb. To human beings, on the other hand, each
meme equal to several or many times its rate of endogenous change." The
vehicle is a potential friend or foe, bearing a gift that will enhance our
powers importance of the separation between information and vehicle is
even easier or a gift horse that will distract us, burden our memories,
derange our to discern in the case of memes.5 The obvious problem noted
by all is that it judgment.

is very unlikely—but not quite impossible—that there is a uniform "brain
language" in which information is stored in different human brains, and this
makes brains very different from chromosomes. Geneticists have recently 3.
C

identified a chromosomal structure they call the homeobox; in spite of
OULD THERE BE A SCIENCE OF MEMETICS?

differences, this structure is identifiable in widely separated species of
animals—perhaps in them all—so it is very ancient, and it plays a central
role The scope of the undertaking strikes me as staggering. But more than
in embryological development. We may be startled at first to learn that a
gene this, if one accepts the evolutionary perspective, attempts to discuss
identified as playing a major role in eye development in the homeobox of
science (or any other sort of conceptual activity) become much more mice
has almost the same codon spelling as a gene dubbed (for its phenotypic
difficult, so difficult as to produce total paralysis.

effect) eyeless when it was identified in the homeobox of the fruitfly,

—DAVID HULL 1982, p. 299

Drosophila. But we would be even more flabbergasted were we to discover
that the brain-cell complex that stored the original meme for bifocals in

Memes are capable of instructing, not protein synthesis as genes do, but
Benjamin Franklin's brain was the same as, or very similar to, the brain-cell
behaviour. However, genes can do that too indirectly through protein
complex that is called upon today to store the meme for bifocals whenever
synthesis. On the other hand meme replication, by involving any child in
Asia, Africa, or Europe first learns about them—by reading neurostructural
modifications, is invariably associated with the induc-about them, seeing
them on television, or noticing them on a parent's nose.

tion of protein synthesis.

What this reflection makes vivid is the fact that what is preserved and

—JUAN DELIUS 1991, p. 84

transmitted in cultural evolution is informa-

This is all very enticing, but we have been glossing over a host of
complications. I can hear a chorus of skepticism building in the wings.
Remem-5 For a good discussion of the embattled relation between gene talk
and molecule talk, see Waters 1990.

354 THE CRANES OF CULTURE

Could There Be a Science of Memetics? 355

Hon—in a media-neutral, language-neutral sense. Thus the meme is primar-
instead of just dutifully passing on their messages, correcting most of the ily
a semantic classification, not a syntactic classification that might be typos
as they go, brains seem to be designed to do just the opposite: to directly
observable in "brain language" or natural language.

transform, invent, interpolate, censor, and generally mix up the "input"
before In the case of genes, we are blessed by a gratifyingly strong
alignment of yielding any "output." Isn't one of the hallmarks of cultural
evolution and semantic and syntactic identity: there is a single genetic
language, in which transmission the extraordinarily high rate of mutation
and recombination? We meaning is (roughly) preserved across all species.

Still, it is important to seldom pass on a meme unaltered, it seems, unless
we are particularly literal-distinguish semantic types from syntactic types.
In the Library of Babel we minded rote learners. (Are walking
encyclopedias hidebound?) Moreover, as identify a set of syntactic text-
variants as all falling into the Moby Dick Steven Pinker has stressed
(personal communication), much of the mutation galaxy by virtue of what
they tell us about, not their syntactic similarity.

that happens to memes—how much is not clear—is manifestly directed
(Think of all the different translations of Moby Dick into other languages,
and mutation: "Memes such as the theory of relativity are not the
cumulative also the English abridgments, outlines, and study aids—to say
nothing of the product of millions of random (undirected) mutations of
some original idea, versions in film and other media!) Our interest in
identifying and rebut each brain in the chain of production added huge
dollops of value to the identifying genes over the evolutionary ages is
similarly primarily because of product in a nonrandom way." Indeed, the
whole power of minds as meme the uniformity of the phenotypic effects—
what they are "about" (such as nests comes from what a biologist would call
lineage-crossing or making hemoglobin, or eyes). Our ability to rely on
their syntactic identi-anastomosis (the coming back together of separating
gene-pools). As Gould fiability in DNA is a recent advance, and even when
we cannot conceivably (1991a, p. 65) points out, "The basic topologies of
biological and cultural avail ourselves of it (for instance, in deducing facts
about genetic changes change are completely different. Biological evolution
is a system of constant from what we can observe in the fossil record of
species that have left no divergence without subsequent joining of branches.
Lineages, once distinct, DNA for us to "read"), we can still confidently
speak of the genes—the are separate forever. In human history, transmission
across lineages is, information—that must have been preserved or
transmitted.

perhaps, the major source of cultural change."

It is conceivable, but hardly likely and certainly not necessary, that we will
Moreover, when memes come into contact with each other in a mind, they
someday discover a striking identity between brain structures storing the

have a marvelous capacity to become adjusted to each other, swiftly
changing same information, allowing us to identify memes syntactically.
Even if we their phenotypic effects to fit the circumstances—and it is the
recipe for the encountered such an unlikely blessing, however, we should
cling to the more new phenotype that then gets replicated when the mind
broadcasts or abstract and fundamental concept of memes, since we already
know that publishes the results of this mixing. For instance, my three-year-
old meme transmission and storage can proceed indefinitely in noncerebral
grandson, who loves construction machinery, recently blurted out a fine
forms—in artifacts of every kind—that do not depend on a shared language
mutation on a nursery rhyme: "Pop! goes the diesel." He didn't even notice
of description. If ever there was "multimedia" transmission and transforma-
what he had done, but I, to whom the phrase would never have occurred,
tion of information, it is cultural transmission and transformation. So some
of have now seen to it that this mutant meme gets replicated. As in the case
of the varieties of reductionistic triumph we have come to expect in biology
—

jokes discussed earlier, this modest moment of creativity is a mixture of
discovering exactly how many different ways hemoglobin is "spelled" in all
serendipity and appreciation, distributed over several minds, no one of
which the species in the world, for instance—are almost certainly ruled out
in any gets to claim the authorship of special creation. It is a sort of
Lamarckian science of culture, notwithstanding the prophecies of a golden
age of mind-replication of acquired characteristics, as Gould and others
have suggested.6

reading one sometimes hears these days from the ideologues of neu-The
very creativity and activity of human minds as temporary homes for
roscience.

memes seems to guarantee that lines of descent are hopelessly muddled,
and This would thwart only some kinds of memetic science, but isn't the
that phenotypes (the "body designs" of memes) change so fast that there's
no situation actually worse than that? Darwinian evolution, as we have
seen, keeping track of the "natural kinds." Recall, from chapter depends on
very high-fidelity copying—almost but not quite perfect copying, thanks to

the exquisite proofreading and duplication machinery of the DNA-readers
that accompany the DNA texts. Raise the mutation rate just a bit too 6.
Usually, the "charge" that cultural evolution is Lamarckian is a deep
confusion, as Hull high and evolution goes haywire; natural selection can
no longer work to (1982) carefully points out, but in this version it is
undeniable—though also not a guarantee fitness over the long run. Minds
(or brains), on the other hand,

"charge." In particular, the entity that exhibits the Lamarckian talent of
passing on an aren't much like photocopying machines at all. On the
contrary, acquired characteristic is not the human agent, but the meme itself.

356 THE CRANES OF CULTURE

Could There Be a Science ofMemetics? 357

10 (p. 293), that species are invisible without a modicum of stasis, but
reinvented a wheel, rediscovered a cultural "universal" that will appear, on
its remember, too, that this is an epistemological, not a metaphysical, point:
if own, in almost any cultural evolution. The more purely semantic our
species weren't rather static, we couldn't find out and organize the facts
principles of identification are—or, in other words, the less bound they are
to needed to do certain kinds of science; that wouldn't show, however, that
the particular forms of expression—the harder it is to trace descent with
phenomena weren't governed by natural selection. Similarly, the conclusion
confidence. (Remember that it was peculiarities in the particular form of
here would be a pessimistic epistemological conclusion: even if memes do
expression that gave Otto Neugebauer his crucial clue in deciphering the
originate by a process of "descent with modification," our chances of
mystery of the Greek translation of the Babylonian ephemeris in chapter 6.)
cranking out a science that charts that descent are slim.

This is the same epistemological problem, in the science of culture, that
Once the worry is put in that form, it points to what may seem to be a
taxonomists confront when they try to sort out homology from analogy,
partial solution. One of the most striking features of cultural evolution is the
ancestral from derived characters, in cladistic analysis (Mark Ridley 1985).

ease, reliability, and confidence with which we can identify commonalities
in Ideally, in the imagined field of cultural cladistics, one would want to
find spite of the vast differences in underlying media. What do Romeo and
Juliet

"characters"—literally, alphabetic characters—that are functionally optional
and (the film, let's say, of) West Side Story have in common (Dennett
1987b)?

choices within a huge class of possible alternatives. If we found whole Not
a string of English characters, not even a sequence of propositions (in
speeches by Tony and Maria that suspiciously replicated the words and
English or French or German... translation). What is in common, of course,
is phrases of Romeo and Juliet, we wouldn't need autobiographical clues
from not a syntactic property or system of properties but a semantic
property or Laurents, Robbins, or Bernstein. We wouldn't hesitate to declare
that the system of properties: the story, not the text; the characters and their
coincidence of the words was no coincidence; Design Space is too Vast to
personalities, not their names and speeches. What we so readily identify as
the make that credible.

same thing in both cases is the predicament that both William Shakespeare
In general, however, we can't count on such discoveries in our attempts at a
and Arthur Laurents (who wrote the book for West Side Story) want us to
science of cultural evolution. Suppose, for instance, we want to argue that
think about. So it is only at the level of intentional objects, once we have
such institutions as agriculture or monarchy, or even such particular
practices adopted the intentional stance, that we can describe these common
as tattooing or shaking hands, descend from a common cultural ancestor
properties.7 When we do adopt the stance, the sought-for common features
instead of having been independently reinvented. There is a tradeoff. To the
often stick out like sore thumbs.

extent that we have to go to quite abstract functional (or semantic) levels to
Does this help? Yes, but we must be careful about a problem we have find
our common features, we lose the capacity to tell homology from already
identified in several different guises: the problem of how to tell analog)',
descent from convergent evolution. This has always been tacitly plagiarism

(or respectful borrowing) from convergent evolution. As Hull appreciated
by students of culture, of course, quite independently of (1982, p. 300)
points out, we do not want to consider two identical cultural Darwinian
thinking. Consider what you can deduce from potsherds, for items as
instances of the same meme unless they are related by descent. (The
instance. Anthropologists looking for evidence of shared culture are, quite
genes for octopus eyes are not the same genes as those for dolphin eyes,
properly, more impressed by common idiosyncrasies of decorative style
than however similar the eyes may appear.) This is apt to create a host of
illusions, by common functional shapes. Or consider the fact that two
widely separated or just undecidability, for cultural evolutionists whenever
they attempt to cultures both used boats; this is no evidence at all of a
shared cultural trace the memes for Good Tricks. The more abstract the
level at which we heritage. If both cultures were to paint eyes on the bows
of their boats, it identify the memes, the harder it is to tell convergent
evolution from descent.

would be much more interesting, but still a rather obvious move in the
game We happen to know, because they told us, that the creators of West
Side Story of design. If both cultures were to paint, say, blue hexagons on
the bows of (Arthur Laurents, Jerome Robbins, and Leonard Bernstein) got
the idea from their boats, this would be telling indeed.

Romeo and Juliet, but if they had been carefully secretive about this, we
The anthropologist Dan Sperber, who has thought a great deal about might
well have thought they had simply

cultural evolution, thinks there is a problem with any use of abstract,
intentional objects as the anchors for a scientific project. Such abstract
objects, he claims,

7. Cf. the parallel point about the welcome—indeed, indispensable—power
of adopting the intentional stance as a scientific tactic in
heteropbenomenology, the objective sci-do not directly enter into causal
relations. What caused your indigestion ence of consciousness (Dennett
1991a).

was not the Mornay sauce recipe in the abstract, but your host having read
358 THE CRANES OF CULTURE

Could There Be a Science of Memetics? 359

a public representation, having formed a mental representation, and having
It looks trivial at first, but consider how we can apply it. We can use the
followed it with greater or lesser success. What caused the child's enjoy-
existence of a particular sort of cultural representation endemic to oral able
fear was not the story of Little Red Riding Hood in the abstract, but
traditions to shed light on how human memory works, by asking what it is
her understanding of her mother's words. More to the present point, what
about this sort of representation that makes it more memorable than others.

caused the Mornay sauce recipe or the story of Little Red Riding Hood to
Sperber points out that people are better at remembering a story than thev
become cultural representations is not, or rather is not directly, their are at
remembering a text—at least today, now that the oral tradition is formal
properties, it is the construction of millions of mental representa-waning.8
But even today we sometimes remember—involuntarily—an tions causally
linked by millions of public representations. [Sperber 1985, advertising
jingle, including its precise rhythmic properties, its "tone of pp. 77-78.]

voice," and many other "low-level" features. When scientists decide on
acronyms or cute slogans for their theories, they are hoping thereby to make
What Sperber says about the indirectness of the role of the abstract features
is them more memorable, more vivid and attractive memes. And hence the
certainly true, but, far from this being an obstacle to science, it is the best
sort actual details of the representing are sometimes just as much a
candidate for of invitation to science: an invitation to cut through the
Gordian knot of memehood as the content represented. Using acronyms is
itself a meme—a tangled causation with an abstract formulation that is
predictive precisely meta-meme, of course—which caught on because of its
demonstrated power because it ignores all those complications. For
instance, genes are selected in furthering the content memes whose name
memes it helped to design.

because of their indirect and only statistically visible phenotypic effects.

What is it about acronyms, or about rhymes or "snappy" slogans, that makes
Consider the following prediction: wherever you find moths with
camouflage them fare so well in the competitions that rage through a human
mind?

on their wings, you will find that they have keen-sighted predators, and
This sort of question exploits a fundamental strategy both of evolutionary
wherever you find moths that are heavily predated by echo-locating bats,
you theory and of cognitive science, as we have seen many times. Where
evo-will find that they have traded in wing camouflage for jamming devices
or a lutionary theory considers information transmitted through genetic
channels, particular talent for creating evasive flight patterns. Of course, our
ultimate whatever they are, cognitive science considers information
transmitted goal is to explain whatever features we find in the moths and
their through the channels of the nervous system, whatever they are—plus
the surroundings all the way down to the molecular or atomic mechanisms
adjacent media, such as the translucent air, which transmits sound and light
responsible, but there is no reason to demand that such a reduction be so
well. You can finesse your ignorance of the gory mechanical details of
uniform or generalizable across the board. It is the glory of science that it
can how the information got from A to B, at least temporarily, and just
concen-find the patterns in spite of the noise (Dennett 1991b).

trate on the implications of the fact that some information did get there—
and The peculiarities of human psychology (and human digestion, for that
some other information didn't.

matter, as the Mornay-sauce example shows ) are important eventually, but
Suppose you were given the task of catching a spy, or a whole spy ring, in
they don't stand in the way of a scientific analysis of the phenomenon in the
Pentagon. Suppose what was known was that information about, say,
question. In fact, as Sperber himself has persuasively argued, we can use
nuclear submarines was somehow getting into the hands of the wrong
people.

higher-level principles as levers to pry open lower-level secrets. Sperber
One way of catching the spy would be to insert various tidbits of false (but
points to the importance of the invention of writing, which initiated major

credible) information at various places within the Pentagon and see which
changes in cultural evolution. He shows how to reason from facts about
ones surfaced, in which order, in Geneva or Beirut or wherever the
preliterate culture to facts about human psychology. ( He prefers to think of
marketplace for secrets is. Varying the conditions and circumstances, you
cultural transmission along the lines of epidemiology rather than genetics,
but might gradually build up an elaborate diagram of the route—the various
way the direction of his theory is very much the same as Dawkins'—to the
point stations and transfers and compounding places—even to the point of
of near-indistinguishability when you think of what the Darwinian
treatment of epidemiology looks like; see Williams and Nesse 1991) Here is
Sperber's

"Law of the Epidemiology of Representations": 8. For an analysis of the
astonishing mnemonic powers of the oral tradition, see Albert In an oral
tradition, all cultural representations are easily remembered Lord's classic,
The Singer of Tales (1960), about the technology of verse memorization
ones; hard to remember representations are forgotten, or transformed into
developed by bards from Homer's day to modern times in the Balkan
countries and more easily remembered ones, before reaching a cultural level
of distri-elsewhere.

bution. [Sperber 1985, p. 86.]

360 THE CRANES OF CULTURE

The Philosophical Importance ofMemes 361

arresting and duly convicting the spy ring, and yet still be in the dark about
4. THE PHILOSOPHICAL IMPORTANCE OF MEMES

the medium of communication used. Was it radio? Microdots glued to
documents? Semaphore flags? Did the agent memorize the blueprint and
simply Cultural 'evolution' is not really evolution at all if we are being fussy
walk naked across the border, or did he have a verbal description in Morse
and purist about our use of words, but there may be enough in common
code hidden on a floppy disk in his computer?

between them to justify some comparison of principles.

In the end, we want to know the answers to all these questions, but in the

—R

meantime there is a lot we can do in the substrate-neutral domain of pure
ICHARD DAWKINS 1986a, p. 216

information transfer. In cognitive science, for example, the linguist Ray
Jackendoflf (1987, 1993) shows the surprising power of this method in his
There is no more reason to expect a cultural practice transmitted ingenious
deductions about the number of representational levels, and their between
churchgoers to increase churchgoers' fitness than there is to powers, that
must go into such tasks as getting information from the light that expect a
similarly transmitted flu virus to increase fitness.

strikes our eyes all the way to places where we can talk about what we see.

—GEORGE WILLIAMS 1992, p. 15

He doesn't have to know the details of neurophysiology (though he's
interested, unlike many other linguists) in order to reach confident and
When Dawkins introduced memes in 1976, he described his innovation as
reliable conclusions about the structure of the processes, and the represen-a
literal extension of the classical Darwinian theory. He has since drawn in
tations they transform.

his horns slightly. In The Blind Watchmaker (1986a, p. 196), he spoke of an
What we learn at this abstract level is scientifically important in its own
analogy "which I find inspiring but which can be taken too far if we are not
right. It is, indeed, the basis of everything important. Nobody has ever put it
careful.'' Why did he retreat like this? Why, indeed, is the meme meme so
better than the physicist Richard Feynman:

little discussed eighteen years after The Selfish Gene appeared?

In The Extended Phenotype (1982, p. 112), Dawkins replied forcefully to Is
no one inspired by our present picture of the universe? This value of the
storm of criticism from sociobiologists and others, while conceding some
science remains unsung by singers: you are reduced to hearing not a song
interesting disanalogies between genes and memes:

or poem, but an evening lecture about it. This is not yet a scientific age.

Perhaps one of the reasons for this silence is that you have to know how

... memes are not strung out along linear chromosomes, and it is not clear to
read the music. For instance, the scientific article may say, "The radio-that
they occupy and compete for discrete 'loci', or that they have iden-active
phosphorus content of the cerebrum of the rat decreases to one-half tifiable
alleles'.... The copying process is probably much less precise than in a
period of two weeks." Now, what does that mean?

in the case of genes.... Memes may partially blend with each other in a It
means that phosphorus that is in the brain of a rat—and also in mine, way
that genes do not.

and yours—is not the same phosphorus as it was two weeks ago. It means
the atoms that are in the brain are being replaced: the ones that were there
But then (p. 112 ) he retreated further, apparently in the face of unnamed
before have gone away.

and unquoted adversaries:

So what is this mind of ours: what are these atoms with consciousness?

Last week's potatoes! They now can remember what was going on in my
My own feeling is that its (the meme meme's) main value may lie not so
mind a year ago—a mind which has long ago been replaced.

much in helping us to understand human culture as in sharpening our To
note that the thing I call my individuality is only a pattern or dance,
perception of genetic natural selection. This is the only reason I am pre-that
is what it means when one discovers how long it takes for the atoms

sumptuous enough to discuss it, for I do not know enough about the of the
brain to be replaced by other atoms. The atoms come into my brain, existing
literature on human culture to make an authoritative contribution dance a
dance, and then go out—there are always new atoms, but always to it.

doing the same dance, remembering what the dance was yesterday.
[Feynman 1988, p. 244.]

I suggest that the meme's-eye view of what happened to the meme meme is
quite obvious: "humanist" minds have set up a particularly aggressive set of
filters against memes coming from "sociobiology," and once Dawkins was
identified as a sociobiologist, this almost guaranteed rejection of whatever
362 THE CRANES OF CULTURE

The Philosophical Importance of Memes 363

this interloper had to say about culture—not for good reasons, but just in a
Ship. Suppose Jones encounters or dreams up a truly compelling argument
in sort of immunological rejection.9

favor of suicide—so compelling it leads him to kill himself. If he doesn't
One can see why. The meme's-eye perspective challenges one of the leave a
note explaining why he has done this, the meme in question—at least
central axioms of the humanities. Dawkins (1976, p. 214) points out that in
the Jonesian lineage of it—is not going to spread.

our explanations we tend to overlook the fundamental fact that "a cultural
The most important point Dawkins makes, then, is that there is no nec-trait
may have evolved in the way it has simply because it is advantageous to
essary connection between a meme's replicative power, its "fitness" from its
itself." This is a new way of thinking about ideas, but is it a good way?
When point of view, and its contribution to our fitness (by whatever
standard we we have answered this question, we will know whether or not
the meme judge that). This is an unsettling observation, but the situation is
not totally meme is one we should exploit and replicate.

desperate. Although some memes definitely manipulate us into
collaborating The first rules of memes, as for genes, is that replication is not

necessarily on their replication in spite o/our judging them useless or ugly
or even for the good of anything; replicators flourish that are good at ...
replicating—

dangerous to our health and welfare, many—most, if we are lucky—of the
for whatever reason!

memes that replicate themselves do so not just with our blessings but
because of our esteem for them. I think there can be little controversy that
the A meme that made its bodies run over cliffs would have a fate like that
of following memes are, all things considered, good from our perspective,
and a gene for making bodies run over cliffs. It would tend to be eliminated
not just from their own perspective as selfish self-replicators: such very
from the meme-pool.... But this does not mean that the ultimate criterion
general memes as cooperation, music, writing, calendars, education, for
success in meme selection is gene survival.... Obviously a meme that
environmental awareness, arms reduction; and such particular memes as the
causes individuals bearing it to kill themselves has a grave disadvantage,
Prisoner's Dilemma, The Marriage of Figaro, Moby Dick, returnable
bottles, but not necessarily a fatal one.... A suicidal meme can spread, as
when a the SALT agreements. Other memes are more con-troversial; we
can see why dramatic and well-publicized martyrdom inspires others to die
for a deeply they spread, and why, all things considered, we should tolerate
them, in spite loved cause, and this in turn inspires others to die, and so on.
[Dawkins of the problems they cause for us: colorization of classic films,
advertising on 1982, pp. 110-11.)

television, the ideal of political correctness. Still others are pernicious, but
extremely hard to eradicate: anti-Semitism, hijacking airliners, spray-can
The publicity Dawkins speaks about is crucial, and has a direct parallel in
graffiti, computer viruses.10

Darwinian medicine. As Williams and Nesse ( 1991) have pointed out, dis-
Our normal view of ideas is also a normative view: it embodies a canon or
ease organisms (parasites, bacteria, viruses) depend for their long-term an
ideal about which ideas we ought to accept or admire or approve of. In
survival on hopping from host to host, and this carries important implica-
brief, we ought to accept the true and the beautiful. According to the normal

tions. Depending on how they are spread—through a sneeze or sexual view,
the following are virtual tautologies—trivial truths not worth the ink to
contact, for instance, rather than via a mosquito that bites first an infected
write them down:

person and then an uninfected person—their future may hinge on their
keeping their host up and about rather than on his deathbed. More benign
Idea X was believed by the people because X was deemed true.

variants will be favored by natural selection if the conditions for replication
of the organisms can be rigged so that it is "in their interests" not to harm
People approved of X because people found X to be beautiful.

their hosts. By the same reasoning, we can see that benign or harmless
memes will tend to flourish, other things being equal, and those that tend to
These norms are not just dead obvious, they are constitutive: they set the be
fatal to those whose minds carry them can only flourish if they have some
rules whereby we think about ideas. We require explanations only when
there way of publicizing themselves before—or while—they go down with
the are deviations from these norms. Nobody has to explain why a book
Purports to be full of true sentences, or why an artist might strive to make
something beautiful—it just "stands to reason." The constitutive status of 9.
A striking example of the vituperative and uncomprehending dismissal of
Dawkins by a humanist who identifies him as a sociobiologist is found in
Midgley 1979, an attack so wide of the mark that it should not be read
without its antidote-. Dawkins 1981. Midgley 1983 is an apologetic but still
largely hostile rejoinder.

10. Dawkins 1993 offers an important new perspective on computer viruses
and their relation to other memes.

364 THE CRANES OF CULTURE

The Philosophical Importance of Memes 365

these norms grounds the air of paradox in such aberrations as "The Metro
about whatever we hold dear—our highest values—are themselves very
politan Museum of Banalities" or "The Encyclopedia of Falsehoods." What

much a product of the memes that have spread most successfully. We may
requires special explanation in the normal view are the cases in which
despite want to claim that we are in charge of what our summum bonum is
to be, but the truth or beauty of an idea it is not accepted, or despite its
ugliness or this is mystical nonsense unless we admit that what we are (and
hence what falsehood it is.

we might persuade ourselves to consider the summum bonum) is itself The
meme's-eye view purports to be an alternative to this normal per-something
we have learned to be, in outgrowing our animal heritage. Biology spective.
What is tautological for it is:

puts some constraint on what we could value; in the long run, we would not
survive unless we had a better-than-chance habit of choosing the memes
that Meme X spread among the people because X is a good replicator.

help us, but we haven't seen the long run yet. Mother Nature's experiment
with culture on this planet is only a few thousand generations old.

There is a nice parallel to be found in physics. Aristotelian physics sup-
Nevertheless, we have good reason to believe that our meme-
immunological posed that an object's continuing to move in a straight line
required expla-systems are not hopeless—even if they are not foolproof. We
can rely, as a nation, in terms of something like forces continuing to act on
it. Central to general, crude rule of thumb, on the coincidence of the two
perspectives: by Newton's great perspective shift was the idea that such
rectilinear motion did and large, the good memes—good by our standards
— will tend to be the not require explanation; only deviations from it did—
accelerations. An even ones that are also the good replicators.

better parallel can be seen in biology. Before Williams and Dawkins pointed
The haven all memes depend on reaching is the human mind, but a human
to the alternative gene's-eye perspective, evolutionary theorists tended to
mind is itself an artifact created when memes restructure a human brain in
think that it was just obvious that adaptations existed because they were
good order to make it a better habitat for memes. The avenues for entry and
for the organisms. Now we know better. The gene-centered perspective is
departure are modified to suit local conditions, and strengthened by various

valuable precisely because it handles the "exceptional" cases in which the
artificial devices that enhance fidelity and prolixity of replication: native
good of the organism counts for nothing, and shows how the "normal"

Chinese minds differ dramatically from native French minds, and literate
circumstance is a derivative and exceptioned regularity, not a truth of pure
minds differ from illiterate minds. What memes provide in return to tile
reason, as it seemed to be from the old perspective.

organisms in which they reside is an incalculable store of advantages—
with The prospects for meme theory become interesting only when we look
at some Trojan horses thrown in for good measure, no doubt. Normal
human the exceptions, the circumstances under which there is a pulling
apart of the brains are not all alike; they vary considerably in size, shape,
and the myriad two perspectives. Only if meme theory permits us better to
understand the details of connection on which their prowess depends. But
the most striking deviations from the normal scheme will it have any
warrant for being differences in human prowess depend on microstructural
differences (still accepted. (Note that, in its own terms, whether or not the
meme meme inscrutable to neuroscience) induced by the various memes
that have entered replicates successfully is strictly independent of its
epistemological virtue; it them and taken up residence. The memes enhance
each other's opportunities: might spread in spite of its perniciousness, or go
extinct in spite of its virtue.) the meme for education, for instance, is a
meme that reinforces the very Fortunately for us, there is a nonrandom
correlation between the two process of meme implantation.

perspectives, just as there is between what is good for General Motors and
But if it is true that human minds are themselves to a very great degree the
what is good for America. It is no accident that the memes that replicate
tend creations of memes, then we cannot sustain the polarity of vision we to
be good for us, not for our biological fitness (Williams' sardonic considered
earlier; it cannot be "memes versus us," because earlier infestations of
memes have already played a major role in determining who or
commentary on the churchgoers is absolutely right on that score ), but for
what we are. The "independent" mind struggling to protect itself from alien
whatever it is we hold dear.11 And never forget the crucial point: the facts

and dangerous memes is a myth. There is a persisting tension between the
biological imperative of our genes on the one hand and the cultural
imperatives of our memes on the other, but we would be foolish to "side
with" our 11. Memes that are (relatively) benign to their hosts but vicious to
others are not genes; that would be to commit the most egregious error of
pop so-uncommon, alas. When ethnic pride turns to xenophobia, for
instance, this mirrors the ciobiology. Besides, as we have already noted,
what makes us special is that phenomenon of a tolerable bacillus that
mutates into something deadly—if not necessarily to its original carrier,
then to others.

we, alone among species, can rise above the imperatives of our genes—

thanks to the lifting cranes of our memes.

366 THE CRANES OF CULTURE

The Philosophical Importance of Memes 367

What foundation, then, can we stand on as we struggle to keep our feet in it
under local self-control ( Dennett 1984, p. 55 ). That made it autonomous,
the meme-storm in which we are engulfed? If replicative might does not
and although the goals it continued to seek were the goals Houston had
make right, what is to be the eternal ideal relative to which "we" will judge
installed in it at its birth, it and it alone was responsible for making the the
value of memes? We should note that the memes for normative con-
decisions in furtherance of those goals. Now imagine it landed on some
cepts—for ought and good and truth and beauty—are among the most
distant planet inhabited by tiny green men who promptly invaded it, tam-
entrenched denizens of our minds. Among the memes that constitute us,
they pering with its software and bending it (exapting it) to their own
purposes—

play a central role. Our existence as us, as what we as thinkers are—not as
making it into a recreational vehicle, let's say, or a nursery for their young.

what we as organisms are—is not independent of these memes.

Its autonomy would be lost as it came under the control of these alien
Dawkins ends The Selfish Gene ( 1976, p. 215) with a passage that many
controllers. Switching responsibility from my genes to my memes may
seem of his critics must not have read, or understood:

to be a similarly unpromising step on the road to free will. Have we broken
the tyranny of the selfish genes, only to be taken over by the selfish memes?

We have the power to defy the selfish genes of our birth and, if necessary,
Think about symbionts again. Parasites are (by definition) those sym-bionts
the selfish memes of our indoctrination.... We are built as gene machines
that are deleterious to the fitness of the host. Consider the most obvious and
cultured as meme machines, but we have the power to turn against meme
example: the meme for celibacy (and chastity, I might add, to close a our
creators. We, alone on earth, can rebel against the tyranny of the selfish
notorious loophole ). This meme complex inhabits the brains of many a
priest replicators.

and nun. From the point of view of evolutionary biology, this complex is
deleterious to fitness by definition: anything that virtually guarantees that
the In distancing himself thus forcefully from the oversimplifications of pop
host's germ line is a cul-de-sac, with no further issue, lowers fitness. "But so
sociobiology, he somewhat overstates his case. This "we" that transcends
not what?" a priest might retort. "/ don't want to have progeny!" Exactly.
But, you only its genetic creators but also its memetic creators is, we have
just seen, a might say, his body still does. He has distanced himself
somewhat from his myth. Dawkins himself acknowledges that in his later
work. In The Extended own body, in which the machinery designed by
Mother Nature keeps right on Pbenotype ( 1982 ), Dawkins argues for the
biological perspective that running, sometimes giving him problems of self-
control. How did this self or recognizes the beaver's dam, the spider's web,
the bird's nest as not merely ego with the divergent goal get constituted? We
may not know the detailed products of the phenotype—the individual
organism considered as a history of the infestation. The Jesuits famously
say, "Give us the first five functional whole—but parts of the phenotype, on
a par with the beaver's years of a child's life, and you can have the rest," so
it may be very early in the teeth, the spider's legs, the bird's wing. From this

perspective, the vast priest's life that this particular meme secured a
stronghold. Or it may have protective networks of memes that we spin is as
integral to our pheno-types—

been later, and it may have happened very gradually. But whenever and to
explaining our competences, our chances, our vicissitudes—as anything in
however it happened, it has been incorporated by the priest—at least for the
our more narrowly biological endowment. (This claim is developed in
greater time being—into his identity.

detail in Dennett 1991a.) There is no radical discontinuity; one can be a I
am not saying that because the priest's body is "doomed" to sire no
mammal, a father, a citizen, a scholar, a Democrat, and an associate
professor offspring, this is a bad or "unnatural" thing. That would be to side
with our with tenure. Just as man-made barns are an integral part of the barn
swallow's selfish genes, which is exactly what we don't want to do. I am
saying that this ecology, so cathedrals and universities—and factories and
prisons—are an is just the most extreme, and hence vivid, example of the
process that has integral part of our ecology, as are the memes without
which we could not made us all: our selves have been created out of the
interplay of memes live in these environments.

exploiting and redirecting the machinery Mother Nature has given us. My
But if I am nothing over and above some complex system of interactions
brain harbors the memes for celibacy and chastity (I couldn't write about
between my body and the memes that infest it, what happens to personal
them otherwise ), but they never managed to get into the driver's seat in me.
I responsibility? How could I be held accountable for my misdeeds, or hon-
do not identify with them. My brain also harbors the meme for fasting or
ored for my triumphs, if I am not the captain of my vessel? Where is the
dieting, and I wish I could get it more often into the driver's seat (so that I
autonomy I need to act with free will?

could more wholeheartedly diet), but, for one reason or another, the

"Autonomy" is just a fancy term for "self-control." When the Viking space-
coalitions of memes that would incorporate the meme for dieting into my
craft got too far from Earth for the engineers in Houston to control it, they

whole "heart" seldom form a government with long-term stability. No one
sent it a new program which removed it from their remote control and put
368 THE CRANES OF CULTURE

The Philosophical Importance of Memes 369

meme rules anybody; what makes a person the person he or she is are the
CHAPTER 12: The invasion of human brains by culture, in the form of
coalitions of memes that govern—that play the long-term roles in deter-
memes, has created human minds, which alone among animal minds can
mining which decisions are made along the way. (We will look more
closely conceive of tilings distant and future, and formulate alternative
goals. The at this idea in chapters 16 and 17.)

prospects for elaborating a rigorous science of memetics are doubtful, but
the Whether or not the meme perspective can be turned into science, in its
concept provides a valuable perspective from which to investigate die
philosophical guise it has already done much more good than harm,
contrary complex relationship between cultural and genetic heritage. In
particular, it to what Gould has claimed, even though, as we shall see, there
may be other is the shaping of our minds by memes tiiat gives us the
autonomy to transcend applications of Darwinian thinking in the social
sciences that truly deserve our selfish genes.

Gould's condemnation. What, in fact, is the alternative to this through-and-
through Darwinian vision of a mind? A last hope for the Darwin-dreaders is
CHAPTER 13: A series of ever more powerful types of mind can be defined
in simply to deny that what happens to memes when they enter a mind
could terms of the Tower of Generate-and-Test, which takes us from the
crudest ever, ever be explained in "reductionistic," mechanistic terms. One
way trial-and-error learners to the community of scientists and other
serious would be to espouse outright Cartesian dualism: the mind just can't
be the human thinkers. Language plays the crucial role in this cascade of
cranes, brain, but, rather, some other place, in which great and mysterious
and Noam Chomsky's pioneering work in linguistics opens up die prospect
of alchemical processes occur, transforming the raw materials they are fed
—the a Darwinian theory of language, but this is a prospect he has
mistakenly cultural items we are calling memes—into new items that

transcend their shunned, along widi Gould. The controversies surrounding
die development sources in ways that are simply beyond the ken of
science.12

in recent years of a science of die mind have been sadly amplified into A
slightly less radical way of supporting the same defensive view is to
antagonisms by misperceptions on both sides: are die critics calling for
concede that the mind is, after all, just the brain, which is a physical entity
cranes or skyhooks?

bound by all the laws of physics and chemistry, but insist that it
nevertheless does its chores in ways that defy scientific analysis. This view
has often been suggested by the linguist Noam Chomsky and
enthusiastically defended by his former colleague the
philosopher/psychologist Jerry Fodor (1983), and more recently by another
philosopher, Colin McGinn ( 1991 ). We can see that this is a saltational
view of the mind, positing great leaps in Design Space that get "explained"
as acts of sheer genius or intrinsic creativity or something else science-
defying. It insists that somehow the brain itself is a skyhook, and refuses to
settle for what the wily Darwinian offers: the brain, thanks to all the cranes
that have formed it in the first place, and all the cranes that have entered it
in the second place, is itself a prodigious, but not mysterious, lifter in
Design Space.

It will take some further work to turn this highly metaphorical confrontation
into a more literal one, and resolve it, in chapter 13. Fortunately for me,
much of this work has already been done by me, so I can once again avoid
reinventing the wheel by simply reusing a wheel I've made before. My next
exaptation is from my 1992 Darwin Lecture at Darwin College, Cambridge
(Dennett 1994b).

12. Lewontin, Rose, and Kamin (1984, p. 283) claim that memes
presuppose a "Cartesian" view of the mind, whereas in fact memes are a
key (central but optional) ingredient in the best alternatives to Cartesian
models (Dennett 1991a).

The Role of Language in Intelligence 371

nonmiraculous products of evolution, then they are, in the requisite sense,
artifacts, and all their powers must have an ultimately "mechanical"
explanation. We are descended from macros and made of macros, and
nothing we CHAPTER THIRTEEN

can do is anything beyond the power of huge assemblies of macros (
assembled in space and time).

Losing Our Minds to

Still, there is a huge difference between our minds and the minds of other
species, a gulf wide enough even to make a moral difference. It is—it must
be---due to two intermeshed factors, each of which requires a Darwinian
Darwin

explanation: (1) the brains we are born with have features lacking in other
brains, features that have evolved under selection pressure over the last six
million years or so, and (2) these features make possible an enormous
elaboration of powers that accrue from the sharing of Design wealth
through cultural transmission. The pivotal phenomenon that unites these
two factors is language. We human beings may not be the most admirable
species on the planet, or the most likely to survive for another millennium,
but we are without any doubt at all the most intelligent. We are also the only
species with language.

Is that true? Don't whales and dolphins, vervet monkeys and honeybees 1.
THE ROLE OF LANGUAGE IN INTELLIGENCE

(the list goes on) have languages of sorts? Haven't chimpanzees in
laboratories been taught rudimentary languages of sorts? Yes, and body
language is When ideas fail, words come in very handy.

a sort of language, and music is the international language ( sort of), and

—ANONYMOUS '

politics is a sort of language, and the complex world of odor and olfaction is
another, highly emotionally charged language, and so on. It sometimes

seems We are not like other animals; our minds set us off from them. That
is the that the highest praise we can bestow on a phenomenon we are
studying is claim that inspires such passionate defense. It is curious that
people who want the claim that its complexities entitle it to be called a
language—of sorts.

so much to defend this difference should be so reluctant to examine the This
admiration for language—real language, the sort only we human beings
evidence in its favor coming from evolutionary biology, ethology, pri-use—
is well founded. The expressive, information-encoding properties of
matology, and cognitive science. Presumably, they are afraid they might
learn real language are practically limitless (in at least some dimensions),
and the that, although we are different, we aren't different enough to make
the life-powers that other species acquire in virtue of their use of proto-
languages, defining difference they cherish. For Descartes, after all, the
difference was hemi-semi-demi-languages, are indeed similar to the powers
we acquire absolute and metaphysical: animals were just mindless
automata; we have thanks to our use of real language. These other species
do climb a few steps souls. Descartes and his followers have suffered
calumny over the centuries at up the mountain on whose summit we reside,
thanks to language. Looking at the hands of animal-lovers who have
deplored his claim that animals have no the vast differences between their
gains and ours is one way of approaching souls. More theoretically minded
critics have deplored his faintheartedness the question we now must
address: just how does language contribute to from the opposite pole: how
could such a sound, ingenious mechanist flinch intelligence?

so badly when it came to making an exception for humanity? Of course our
What varieties of thought require language? What varieties of thought (if
minds are our brains, and hence are ultimately just stupendously complex
any) are possible without language? We watch a chimpanzee, with her
soulful

"machines"; the difference between us and other animals is one of huge
degree, not metaphysical kind. It is no coincidence, I have shown, that those
face, inquisitive eyes, and deft fingers, and we very definitely get a sense of
who deplore Artificial Intelligence are also those who deplore evolutionary

the mind within, but, the more we watch, the more our picture of her mind
accounts of human mentality: if human minds are

swims before our eyes. In some ways she is so human, so insightful; yet we
soon learn (to our dismay or relief, depending on our hopes ) that in other
ways she is so dense, so uncomprehending, so unreachably cut off from our
human world. How could a chimp who so obviously understands A fail to
1. This bon mot appeared in the Tufts Daily, attributed to Johann Wolfgang
von Goethe, understand B? Consider a few simple questions about
chimpanzees.

but I daresay it is a meme of more recent birth.

372 LOSING OUR MINDS TO DARWIN

The Role of Language in Intelligence 373

Could they learn to tend a fire—could they gather firewood, keep it dry, the
way we do. The differences are not necessarily in the products, but in the
preserve the coals, break the wood, keep the fire size within proper bounds?

control structures within the brains that create them. A child might study a
And if they couldn't invent these novel activities on their own, could they
be weaverbird building its nest, and then replicate the nest herself, finding
the trained by human beings to do these things? Here's another question.
Suppose right pieces of grass, and weaving them in the right order, creating,
by the you imagine something novel—I hereby invite you to imagine a man
very same series of steps, an identical nest. A film of the two building
climbing up a rope with a plastic garbage-pail over his head. An easy
mental processes occurring side by side might overwhelm us with a sense
that we task for you. Could a chimpanzee do the same thing in her mind's
eye? I were seeing the same phenomenon twice, but it would be a big
mistake to wonder. I chose the elements—man, rope, climbing, pail, head—
as familiar impute to the bird the sort of thought processes we know or
imagine to be objects in the perceptual and behavioral world of a laboratory
chimp, but I going on in the child. There could be very little in common
between the wonder whether a chimp could put them together in this novel
way—even by processes going on in the child's brain and in the bird's brain.

The bird is accident, as it were. You were provoked to perform your mental
act by my (apparently) endowed with a collection of interlocking special-
purpose verbal suggestion, and probably you often perform similar mental
acts on minimalist subroutines, well designed by evolution according to the
your own in response to verbal suggestions you give yourself—not out
loud, notorious need-to-know principle of espionage: give each agent as
little but definitely in words. Could it be otherwise? Could a chimpanzee
get itself information as will suffice for it to accomplish its share of the
mission.

to perform such a mental act without the help of verbal suggestion?

Control systems designed under this principle can be astonishingly suc-
These are rather simple questions about chimpanzees, but nobody knows
cessful—witness the birds' nests, after all—whenever the environment has
the answers—yet. The answers are not impossible to acquire, but not easy
enough simplicity and regularity, and hence predictability, to favor pre-
either; controlled experiments could yield the answers, which would shed
design of the whole system. The system's very design in effect makes a
light on the role of language in turning brains into minds like ours. I raise
the prediction—a wager, in fact—that the environment will be the way it
must be question about whether chimpanzees could learn to tend a fire
because, at for the system to work. When the complexity of encountered
environments some point in prehistory, our ancestors tamed fire. Was
language necessary rises, however, and unpredictability becomes a more
severe problem, a for this great civilizing advance? Some of the evidence
suggests that it different design principle kicks in: the commando-team
principle, illustrated happened hundreds of thousands of years—or even as
much as a million by such films as The Guns of Navarone, give each agent
as much knowledge years (Donald 1991, p. 114)— before the advent of
language, but of course about the total project as possible, so that the team
has a chance of ad-libbing after our hominid line split away from the
ancestors of modern apes, such as appropriately when unanticipated
obstacles arise.

chimpanzees. Opinions differ sharply. Many researchers are convinced that
So there is a watershed in the terrain of evolutionary Design Space; when a

language began much earlier, in plenty of time to underwrite the tarn ing of
control problem lies athwart it, it could be a matter of chance which
direction fire (Pinker 1994). We might even try to argue that the taming of
fire is itself evolution propels the successful descendants. Perhaps, then,
there are two incontrovertible evidence for the existence of early language
—if we can just ways of tending fires—roughly, the beaver-dam way and
our way. If so, it's a convince ourselves that this mental feat required
rudimentary language. Or is good thing for us that our ancestors didn't hit
upon the beaver-dam way, for if fire-tending not such a big deal? Perhaps
the only reason we don't find they had, the woods might today be full of
apes sitting around campfires, but chimps in the wild sitting around
campfires is that in their rainy habitats there we would not be here to
marvel at them.

is never enough tinder around to give fire a chance to be tamed. (Sue
Savage-I want to propose a framework in which we can place the various
design Rumbaugh's pygmy chimps in Atlanta love to go on picnics in the
woods, options for brains, to see where their power comes from. It is an
outrageously and enjoy staring into the campfire's flames, just as we do, but
she tells me oversimplified structure, but idealization is the price one should
often be she doubts that they could be relied on to tend a fire, even with
training.) willing to pay for synoptic insight. I call it the Tower of Generate-
and-Test; If termites can create elaborate, well-ventilated cities of mud, and
wea-as each new floor of the Tower gets constructed, it empowers the
organisms verbirds can weave audaciously engineered hanging nests, and
beavers can at that level to find better and better moves, and find them more
efficiently.2

build dams that take months to complete, couldn't chimpanzees tend a
simple campfire? This rhetorical question climbs a misleading ladder of
abilities. It ignores the independently well-evidenced possibility that there
are two profoundly different ways of building dams: the way beavers do
and 2. This is an elaboration of ideas I first presented in Dennett 1975.1
recently discovered that Konrad Lorenz (1973) described a similar cascade
of cranes—in different terms, of course.

374 LOSING OUR MINDS TO DARWIN

The Role of Language in Intelligence 375

In the beginning—once the pump had been primed—there was Darwinian
evolution of species by natural selection. A variety of candidate organisms
were blindly generated by more or less arbitrary processes of recombination
and mutation of genes. These organisms were field-tested, and only the best
designs survived. This is the ground floor of the Tower. Let us call its
inhabitants Darwinian creatures.

Skinnerian creature "blindly" .. . until one is selected by Next time, the
creature's first tries different responses . . .

"reinforcement."

choice will be the reinforced response.

FIGURE 13.2

options before risking them in the harsh world. We human beings are
creatures capable of this third refinement, but we are not alone. We may call
the beneficiaries of this third story in the Tower Popperian creatures, since,
Darwinian creatures, different

selection of one favored

multiplication of the

as Sir Karl Popper once elegantly put it, this design enhancement "permits

"hard-wired" phenotypes

phenotype

favored genotype

our hypotheses to die in our stead." Unlike the merely Skinnerian creatures,
FIGURE 131

many of whom survive only because they make lucky first moves,
Popperian This process went through many millions of cycles, producing
many creatures survive because they're smart enough to make better-than-
chance wonderful designs, both plant and animal, and eventually among its
novel first moves. Of course, they're just lucky to be smart, but that's better
than creations were some designs with the property of phenotypic plasticity.
The just being lucky.

individual candidate organisms were not wholly designed at birth, or, in
other words, there were elements of their design that could be adjusted by
events that occurred during the field tests. (This is what makes the Baldwin
Effect possible, as we saw in chapter 3, but now we are going to focus on
the intra-organismic design that sets up that crane.) Some of these
candidates, we may suppose, were no better off than their hard-wired
cousins, since they had no way of favoring ( selecting for an encore ) the
behavioral options they were equipped to "try out," but others, we may
suppose, were fortunate enough to have wired-in "reinforcers" that
happened to favor Smart Moves, actions that were better for their agents.
These individuals thus confronted the Popperian creature has an inner

First time, the creature acts in a

environment by generating a variety of actions, which they tried out, one by
selective environment that previews

foresightful way (better than chance).

candidate acts.

one, until they found one that worked. We may call this subset of Darwinian
creatures, the creatures with conditionable plasticity, Skinnerian creatures,
FIGURE 13-3

since, as B. F. Skinner was fond of pointing out, operant conditioning is not
But how is this preselection in Popperian agents to be done? Where is the
just analogous to Darwinian natural selection; it is continuous with it.
"Where feedback to come from? It must come from a sort of inner
environment—an inherited behavior leaves off, the inherited modifiability
of the process of inner something-or-other that is structured in such a way
that the surrogate conditioning takes over" (Skinner 1953, p. 83).

actions it favors are more often than not the very actions the real world
would Skinnerian conditioning is a fine capacity to have, so long as you are
not also bless, if they were actually performed. In short, the inner
environment, killed by one of your early errors. A better system involves
preselection whatever it is, must contain lots of information about the outer
environment among all the possible behaviors or actions, weeding out the
truly stupid and its regularities. Nothing else ( except magic ) could provide
preselection 376 LOSING OUR MINDS TO DARWIN

The Role of Language in Intelligence 377

worth having. Now, here we must be very careful not to think of this inner
hard-wiring under a new layer of pre-emptive control ( a theme developed
in environment as simply a replica of the outer world, with all its physical
con-the work of the AI researcher Rodney Brooks [e.g., 1991] ). It is these
higher tingencies reproduced. (In such a miraculous toy world, the little hot
stove in levels of control that have the potential for vast increases in
versatility. And your head would be hot enough actually to burn the little
finger in your head it is at these levels in particular that we should look for
the role of language that you placed on it!) The information about the world
has to be there, but it (when it finally arrives on the scene), in turning our
brains into virtuoso also has to be structured in such a way that there is a
nonmiraculous preselectors.

explanation of how it got there, how it is maintained, and how it actually
We engage in our share of rather mindless routine behavior, but our

achieves the preselective effects that are its raison d'etre.

important acts are often directed on the world with incredible cunning,
Which animals are Popperian creatures, and which are merely Skinner-ian?

composing projects exquisitely designed under the influence of vast
libraries Pigeons were Skinner's favorite experimental animals, and he and
his of information about the world. The instinctual actions we share with
other followers developed the technology of operant conditioning to a very
so-species show the benefits derived from the harrowing explorations of our
phisticated level, getting pigeons to exhibit quite bizarre and sophisticated
ancestors. The imitative actions we share with some higher animals may
learned behaviors. Notoriously, the Skinnerians never succeeded in proving
show the benefits of information gathered not just by our ancestors, but also
that pigeons were not Popperian creatures, and research on a host of
different by our social groups over generations, transmitted nongenetically
by a "traspecies, from octopuses to fish to mammals, strongly suggests that
if there are dition" of imitation. But our more deliberatively planned acts
show the any purely Skinnerian creatures, capable only of blind trial-and-
error benefits of information gathered and transmitted by our conspecifics
in every learning, they are to be found among the simple invertebrates. The
sea slug culture, including, moreover, items of information that no single
individual Aplysia has more or less replaced the pigeon as the focus of
attention among has embodied or understood in any sense. And though
some of this those who study the mechanisms of simple conditioning. (
Researchers information may be of rather ancient acquisition, much of it is
brand-new.

unhesitatingly and uncontroversially rank species in terms of how
intelligent When comparing the time scales of genetic and cultural
evolution, it is useful they are. This involves no myopic endorsement of the
Great Chain of Being, to bear in mind that we today—every one of us—can
easily understand many no unwarranted assumptions about climbing the
ladder of progress. It ideas that were simply unthinkable by the geniuses in
our grandparents'

depends on objective measures of cognitive competence. The octopus, for
generation!

instance, is stunningly smart, a fact that would not be available to surprise
us The successors to mere Popperian creatures are those whose inner en-if
there weren't ways of measuring intelligence that are independent of
vironments are informed by the designed portions of the outer environment.

phylogenetic chauvinism.)

We may call this sub-sub-subset of Darwinian creatures Gregorian
creatures, We do not differ from all other species in being Popperian
creatures, then.

since the British psychologist Richard Gregory is to my mind the pre-
eminent Far from it; mammals and birds and reptiles and fish all exhibit the
capacity theorist of the role of information (or, more exactly, what Gregory
calls to use information from their environments to presort their behavioral
options Potential Intelligence) in the creation of Smart Moves (or what
Gregory calls before striking out. We have now reached the story of the
Tower on which I Kinetic Intelligence). Gregory observes that a pair of
scissors, as a well-want to build. Once we get to Popperian creatures,
creatures whose brains designed artifact, is not just a result of intelligence,
but an endower of have the potential to be shaped into inner environments
with preselective intelligence ( external Potential Intelligence ), in a very
straight-forward and prowess, what happens next? How does new
information about the outer intuitive sense: when you give someone a pair
of scissors, you enhance his environment get incorporated into these brains?
This is where earlier design potential to arrive more safely and swiftly at
Smart Moves (Gregory 1981, decisions come back to haunt—to constrain—
the designer. In particular, pp. 31 Iff).

choices that evolution has already made between need-to-know and
Anthropologists have long recognized that the advent of tool use accom-
commando-team now put major constraints on the options for design panied
a major increase in intelligence. Chimpanzees in the wild fish for
improvement. If a particular species' brain design has already gone down
the termites with crudely prepared fishing sticks. This fact takes on further
need-to-know path with regard to some control problem, only minor
significance when we learn that not all chimpanzees have hit upon the trick;
modifications (fine tuning, you might say) can be readily made to the

existing in some chimpanzee "cultures," termites are a present but
unexploited food structures, so the only hope of making a major revision of
the internal source. That reminds us that tool use is a two-way sign of
intelligence; not environment to account for new problems, new features of
the external only does it require intelligence to recognize and maintain a
tool (let alone environment that matter, is to submerge the old fabricate
one), but tool use confers intelligence on those who are lucky 378 LOSING
OUR MINDS TO DARWIN

The Role of Language in Intelligence 379

enough to be given the tool. The better designed the tool (the more infor-
and hiding, and their kin enter a child's brain, they find homes already
mation embedded in its fabrication), the more Potential Intelligence it
partially built for them. Ray Jackendoff (1993) and other linguists have
confers on its user. And among the pre-eminent tools, Gregory reminds us,
identified fundamental structures of spatial representation—notably
designed are what he calls "mind-tools": words.

to enhance the control of locomotion and the placement of movable things
—

that underlie our intuitions about concepts like beside, on, behind, and their
kin. Nicholas Humphrey (1976,1983,1986) has argued that there must be a
genetic predisposition for adopting the intentional stance, and Alan Leslie
(1992 ) and others have developed evidence for this, in the form of what he
calls a "theory of mind module" designed to generate second-order beliefs
(beliefs about the beliefs and other mental states of others). Some autistic
children seem to be well described as suffering from the disabling of this
module, for which they can occasionally make interesting compensatory
adjustments. (For an overview, see Baron-Cohen 1995.) So the words (and
hence memes) that take up residence in a brain, like so many earlier design
novelties we have considered, enhance and shape pre-existing structures,
rather than generating entirely new architectures (see Sperber [in press] for
a Darwinian overview of this exaptation of genetically provided functions
by Gregorian creature imports mind-tools

culturally transmitted functions). Though these newly redesigned functions
from the (cultural) environment; these

improve both the generators and the

are not made from whole cloth, they do create an explosive new capacity to
testers.

look ahead.

FIGURE 13.4

An internal model allows a system to look ahead to the future conse-Words
and other mind-tools give a Gregorian creature an inner environ-quences of
current actions, without actually committing itself to those ment that
permits it to construct ever more subtle move-generators and actions. In
particular, the system can avoid acts that would set it irretriev-move-testers.
Skinnerian creatures ask themselves, "What do I do next?" and ably down
some road to future disaster ("stepping off a cliff"). Less dra-haven't a clue
how to answer until they have taken some hard knocks.

matically, but equally important, the model enables the agent to make
Popperian creatures make a big advance by asking themselves, "What
should current "stage-setting" moves that set up later moves that are
obviously I think about next?" before they ask themselves, "What should I
do next?"

advantageous. The very essence of a competitive advantage, whether it be
Gregorian creatures take a further big step by learning how to think better in
chess or economics, is the discovery and execution of stage-setting about
what they should think about next—and so forth, a tower of further moves.
[Holland 1992, p. 25.]

internal reflections with no fixed or discernible limit.

What happens to a human or hominid brain when it becomes equipped This,
then, is the crane to end all cranes: an explorer that does have with words?
In particular, what is the shape of this environment when words foresight,

that can see beyond the immediate neighborhood of options. But first enter
it? It is definitely not an even playing field or a tabula rasa. Our how good
can the "stage-setting" be without the intervention of language to newfound
words must anchor themselves on the hills and valleys of a help control the
manipulation of the model? How intricate and long-range can landscape of
considerable complexity. Thanks to earlier evolutionary pres-the look-ahead
be, for instance? This is the relevance of my question about sures, our
innate quality spaces are species-specific, narcissistic, and even the
chimpanzee's capacities to visualize a novel scene. Darwin (1871, p. 57 )
idiosyncratic from individual to individual. A number of investigators are
was convinced that language was the prerequisite for "long trains of
thought,"

currently exploring portions of this terrain. The psychologist Frank Keil and
this claim has been differently supported by several recent theorists, (1992)
and his colleagues at Cornell have evidence that certain highly especially
Julian Jaynes (1976) and Howard Margolis (1987). Long trains of abstract
concepts—such as the concepts of being alive or ownership, for thought
have to be controlled, or they will wander off into delicious if futile instance
—have a genetically imposed head start in the young child's kit of
woolgathering. These authors suggest, plausibly, that the self-exhortations
mind-tools; when the specific words for owning, giving and taking, keeping
and reminders made possible by language are actually 380 LOSING OUR
MINDS TO DARWIN

The Role of Language in Intelligence 381

essential to maintaining the sorts of long-term projects only we human
beings Let me sum up the results of this rather swift survey. Our human
brains, engage in (unless, like the beaver, we have a built-in specialist for
completing and only human brains, have been armed by habits and
methods, mind-tools a particular long-term project). (For further
explorations of these topics, see and information, drawn from millions of
other brains which are not ancestral Clark and Karmiloff-Smith 1994,
Dennett 1994c.)

to our own brains. This, amplified by the deliberate, foresightful use of This
brings me to the final step up the Tower of Generate-and-Test. There

generate-and-test in science, puts our minds on a different plane from the is
one more embodiment of that wonderful idea, and it is the one that gives
minds of our nearest relatives among the animals. This species-specific pro-
our minds their greatest power: once we have language—a bountiful kit of
cess of enhancement has become so swift and powerful that a single gen-
mind-tools—we can use these tools in the structure of deliberate,
foresightful eration of its design improvements can now dwarf the R-and-D
efforts of generate-and-test known as science. All the other varieties of
generate-and-millions of years of evolution by natural selection. Comparing
our brains test are willy-nilly.

anatomically with chimpanzee brains (or dolphin brains or any other non-
The soliloquy that accompanies the errors committed by the lowliest human
brains) would be almost beside the point, because our brains are in
Skinnerian creature might be "Well, I mustn't do that again!" and the
hardest effect joined together into a single cognitive system that dwarfs all
others.

lesson for any agent to learn, apparently, is how to learn from its own They
are joined by an innovation that has invaded our brains and no others:
mistakes. In order to learn from them, one has to be able to contemplate
them, language. I am not making the foolish claim that all our brains are
knit and this is no small matter. Life rushes on, and unless one has
developed together by language into one gigantic mind, thinking its
transnational positive strategies for recording one's tracks, the task known
in AI as credit thoughts, but, rather, that each individual human brain,
thanks to its com-assignment (also known, of course, as "blame
assignment" ) is insoluble. The municative links, is the beneficiary of the
cognitive labors of the others in a advent of high-speed still photography
was a revolutionary technological way that gives it unprecedented powers.

advance for science because it permitted human beings, for the first time, to
Naked animal brains are no match at all for the heavily armed and outfitted
examine complicated temporal phenomena not in real time but in their own
brains we carry in our heads. This fact reverses the burden of proof in what
good time—in leisurely, methodical backtracking analysis of the traces they
would otherwise be a compelling argument: the claim, first considered by

the had created of those complicated events. Here a technological advance
linguist Noam Chomsky ( 1975 ) and more recently defended by the carried
in its wake a huge enhancement in cognitive power. The advent of
philosophers Jerry Fodor ( 1983 ) and Colin McGinn ( 1991), that our
minds, language was an exactly parallel boon for human beings, a
technology that like those of all other species, must suffer "cognitive
closure" with regard to created a whole new class of objects-to-contemplate,
verbally embodied some topics of inquiry. Spiders can't contemplate the
concept of fishing; surrogates that could be reviewed in any order at any
pace. And this opened birds (some of whom are excellent at fishing) aren't
up to thinking about up a new dimension of self-improvement—all one had
to do was learn to democracy. What is inaccessible to the dog or the dolphin
may be readily savor one's own mistakes.

grasped by the chimp, but the chimp in turn will be cognitively closed to
Science, however, is not just a matter of making mistakes, but of making
some domains we human beings have no difficulty thinking about.
Chomsky mistakes in public. Making mistakes for all to see, in the hopes of
getting the and company ask a rhetorical question: What makes us think we
are differ-others to help with the corrections. It has been plausibly
maintained, by ent? Aren't there bound to be strict limits on what Homo
sapiens may Nicholas Humphrey, David Premack (1986), and others, that
chimpanzees conceive?

are natural psychologists—what I would call second-order intentional sys-
According to Chomsky, all matters of human puzzlement can be sorted
tems, capable of adopting the intentional stance towards other things. This
is into "problems," which can be solved, and "mysteries," which cannot.
The not surprising if our own innate equipment includes a theory-of-mind
problem of free will, Chomsky opines, is one such mystery.3 The problem
of module, as Leslie, Baron-Cohen, and others have maintained, for perhaps
this consciousness, according to Fodor, is another, and McGinn concurs. As
the is part of the endowment chimpanzees and we inherit from a common
author of books (1984, 1991a) that claim to explain each of these ancestor.
But even if chimpanzees are, like us, innately equipped as natural
psychologists, they nevertheless lack a crucial feature shared by all human
natural psychologists, folk and professional varieties: they never get to

com-3. In fairness to Chomsky, all he says is that free will might be a
mystery. "I am not urging pare notes. They never dispute over attributions,
and ask to know the grounds this conclusion, but merely noting that it is not
to be ruled out a priori" ( Chomsky 1975, for each other's conclusions. No
wonder their comprehension is so limited.

P-157). This mild suggestion has been eagerly inflated by others into a
scientifically based Ours would be, too, if we had to generate it all on our
own.

demonstration!

382 LOSING OUR MINDS TO DARWIN

The Role of Language in Intelligence 383

impenetrable mysteries, I can be expected to disagree, but this is not the
place should be unimpressed by the example, for not only can the monkey
not to pursue such issues. Since neither Chomsky nor Fodor thinks he
himself can understand the answers about electrons, it can't understand the
questions explain free will or consciousness, the claim that it is humanly
impossible is (Dennett 1991d). The monkey isn't baffled, not even a little
bit. We definitely doctrinally convenient for them, perhaps, but also in
considerable tension understand the questions about free will and
consciousness well enough to with another claim of theirs. In other moods,
they have both (correctly) hailed know what we're baffled by (if we are), so
until Chomsky and Fodor and the capacity of the human brain to "parse,"
and hence presumably understand, McGinn can provide us with clear cases
of animals ( or people ) who can be the official infinity of grammatical
sentences of a natural language such as baffled by questions whose true
answers could not unbaffle them, they have English. If we can understand
all the sentences (in principle), couldn't we given us no evidence of the
reality or even likelihood of "cognitive closure"

understand the ordered sets of sentences that best express the solutions to
the in human beings.6

problems of free will and consciousness? After all, one of the volumes in
the Their argument is presented as a biological, naturalistic argument, re-
Library of Babel is— must be—the best statement in fewer than five
hundred minding us of our kinship with the other beasts, and warning us not
to fall pages of short grammatical English sentences of the solution to the
problem into the ancient trap of thinking "how like an angel" we human
"souls" are, of free will, and another is the optimal job in English on
consciousness.4 I with our "infinite" minds. But it is in fact a pseudo-
biological argument, one daresay neither of my books is either of those, but
that's life. I can't believe that, by ignoring the actual biological details,
misdirects us away from the that Chomsky or Fodor would declare either of
those books (or the trillions of case that can be made for taking one species
—our species—right off the scale runners-up) to be incomprehensible to a
normal English reader.5 So perhaps of intelligence that ranks the pig above
the lizard and the ant above the they think that the mysteries of free will and
consciousness are so deep that oyster. We certainly cannot rule out the
possibility in principle that our minds no book, of any length, in any
language, could explain them to any intelligent will be cognitively closed to
some domain or other. In fact, as we shall see in being. But that claim has
absolutely no evidence in its favor to be derived more detail in chapter 15,
we can be certain that there are realms of no doubt from any biological
considerations. It must have, um, fallen from the sky.

fascinating and important knowledge that our species, in its actual finitude,
Consider the "closure" argument in more detail. "What is closed to the will
never enter, not because we will butt our heads against some stone wall
mind of a rat may be open to the mind of a monkey, and what is open to us
of utter incomprehension, but because the Heat Death of the universe will
may be closed to the monkey" (McGinn 1991, p. 3 )• Monkeys, for
instance, overtake us before we can get there. This is not, however, a
limitation due to can't grasp the concept of an electron, McGinn reminds us,
but I think we the frailty of our animal brains, a dictate of "naturalism." On
the contrary, a proper application of Darwinian thinking suggests that if we
survive our current self-induced environmental crises, our capacity to
comprehend will continue to grow by increments that are now
incomprehensible to us.

4. Two other books in the Library are the most compelling "refutations" of
these mas-Why shouldn't Chomsky and Fodor and McGinn love this
conclusion? It terpieces, but of course the Library doesn't contain any
refutations, properly so-called, of grants to human minds—and only to
human minds—an indefinitely expand-any of the true books on its shelves.
These hatchet jobs must be merely apparent ing dominion over the puzzles
and problems of the universe, with no limits refutations—an example of a
fact that must be true but is systematically useless, since we in sight. What
could be more wonderful than that? The trouble is, I suspect, could never
tell which books were which, without the help of, say, God. The existence
of this sort of fact will become important in chapter 15.

that they deem the means to be unsatisfactory; if the mind's power is due to
cranes, not skyhooks, they would just as soon settle for mystery. That 5.
Chomsky has in fact revised his earlier views about the nature of language,
making a distinction these days between "E-language" (the external—and
you might say eternal—

attitude, at any rate, has often surfaced in these controversies, and Chomsky
Platonic object, English, in which so many of the books in the Library of
Babel are has been a primary source of authority for it.

written) and "I-language" (the internal, intensional, idiolect of an
individual), and he denies that E-language is a proper object for scientific
study, so he would probably object to the straightforward way I have run
this objection (Steven Pinker [personal communication] ). But there are
more devious ways of running the argument and appealing only to the I-
language of individuals. Can Chomsky or anyone else give a good reason
for 6. Fodor has bitten this bullet: "Nobody has the slightest idea how
anything material believing that any five-hundred-page book of short
sentences meeting the I-language could be conscious. Nobody even knows
what it would be like to have the slightest idea standards of any normal,
literate individual would be incomprehensible ("in principle") about how
anything material could be conscious" (Fodor 1992). In other words, if you
to that person?

so much as think you understand the question of consciousness, you're
mistaken. Take his word for it—and change the subject, please.

384 LOSING OUR MINDS TO DARWIN

Chomsky Contra Darwin: Four Episodes 385

2. CHOMSKY CONTRA DARWIN: FOUR EPISODES

bodies of theory [linguistics and Artificial Intelligence] have had cordial
relations from an early date. And quite rightly, for they rest conceptually on
the same view of the human mind." If only that were true! By 1989, he
could Chomsky, one might think, would have everything to gain by
grounding see how the gulf had widened.

his controversial theory about a language organ in the firm foundation Not
many scientists are great scientists, and not many great scientists get to of
evolutionary theory, and in some of his writings he has hinted at a found a
whole new field, but there are a few. Charles Darwin is one; Noam
connection. But more often he is skeptical.

Chomsky is yet another. In much the way there was biology before Darwin
—

—STEVEN PINKER 1994, p. 355

natural history and physiology and taxonomy and such—all united by
Darwin into what we know as biology today, so there was linguistics before
In the case of such systems as language or wings it is not easy even to
Chomsky. The contemporary scientific field of linguistics, with its imagine
a course of selection that might have given rise to them.

subdisciplines of phonology, syntax, semantics, and pragmatics, its warring

—NOAM CHOMSKY 1988, p. 167

schools and renegade offshoots (computational linguistics in AI, for
instance), its subdisciplines of psycholinguistics and neurolinguistics, grows
A sizeable gulf in communication still exists between cognitive scientists out
of various scholarly traditions going back to pioneer language sleuths and
who entered the field from Al or from the study of problem solving and

theorists from the Grimm brothers to Ferdinand de Saussure and Roman
concept-forming behavior, on the one side, and those who entered from
Jakobson, but it was all unified into a richly interrelated family of scientific
a concern with language, on the other.... When the uniqueness of
investigations by the theoretical advances first proposed by one pioneer,
language processes as a human faculty is emphasized, as it has been by
Noam Chomsky. His slender 1957 book, Syntactic Structures, was an appli-
Chomsky ..., the gulf becomes wider.

cation to natural languages such as English of the results of an ambitious

—HERBERT SIMON and CRAIG KAPLAN 1989, p. 5

theoretical investigation he had undertaken into yet another region of
Design Space: the logical space of all possible algorithms for generating
and On September 11, 1956, at MIT, three papers were presented at a
meeting recognizing the sentences of all possible languages. Chomsky's
work fol-of the Institute for Radio Engineers. One was by Allen Newell and
Herbert lowed closely in the path of Turing's purely logical investigations
into the Simon (1956), "The Logic Theory Machine," and in it they showed,
for the powers of what we now call computers. Chomsky eventually
defined an first time, how a computer could prove nontrivial theorems of
logic. Their ascending scale of types of grammars or types of languages—
the Chomsky

"machine" was the father (or grandfather) of their General Problem Solver
Hierarchy, on which all students of computation theory still cut their teeth
—

(Newell and Simon 1963), and the prototype for the computer language
Lisp, and showed how these grammars were interdefinable with an
ascending scale which is to Artificial Intelligence roughly what the DNA
code is to genetics.

of types of automata or computers—from "finite state machines" through
The Logic Theory Machine is a worthy rival of Art Samuel's checkers

"push-down automata" and "linear bounded machines" to "Turing
machines."

program for the honor of AI-Adam. Another paper was by the psychologist
I can vividly remember the shock wave that rolled through philosophy
George A. Miller, "The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two,"
which when Chomsky's work first came to our attention a few years later. In
1960, went on to be one of the classic papers inaugurating the field of
cognitive my sophomore year at Harvard, I asked Professor Quine what
critics of his psychology (Miller 1956). The third paper was by a twenty-
seven-year-old views I should be reading. (I considered myself at the time
to be an anti-Junior Fellow at Harvard, Noam Chomsky, "Three Models for
the Description Quinian of ferocious conviction, and was already beginning
to develop the of Language" (1956). Retrospective coronations are always a
bit arbitrary, as arguments for my senior thesis, attacking him. Anybody
who was arguing we have seen several times, but Chomsky's talk to the IRE
is as good an event against Quine was somebody I had to know about!) He
immediately sugas any to mark the birth of modern linguistics. Three major
new scientific gested that I should look at the work of Noam Chomsky, an
author few in disciplines born in the same room on a single day—I wonder
how many in the philosophy had heard of at the time, but his fame soon
engulfed us all.

audience had the sense that they were participating in a historic event of
such Philosophers of language were divided in their response to his work.
Some proportions. George Miller did, as he tells us in his account (1979) of
that loved it, and some hated it. Those of us who loved it were soon up to
our meeting. Herbert Simon's own retrospective view of the occasion has
changed eyebrows in transformations, trees, deep structures, and all the
other arcana over the years. In his 1969 book, he drew attention to the
remarkable occasion of a new formalism. Many of those who hated it
condemned it as dreadful, and said of it (p. 47): "Thus the two

386 LOSING OUR MINDS TO DARWIN

Chomsky Contra Darwin: Four Episodes 387

philistine scientism, a clanking assault by technocratic vandals on the beau-
as they are. Chomsky and Fodor heaped scorn on this enterprise, but the
tiful, unanalyzable, unformalizable subtleties of language. This hostile atti-
grounds of their attack gradually shifted in the course of the match, for tude
was overpowering in the foreign-language departments of most major
Schank is no slouch in the bully-baiting department, and he staunchly de-
universities. Chomsky might be a professor of linguistics at MIT, and lin-
fended his research project. Their attack began as a straightforward, "first-
guistics might be categorized, there, as one of the humanities, but
Chomsky's principles" condemnation of conceptual error—Schank was on
one fool's work was science, and science was the Enemy—as every card-
carrying errand or another—but it ended with a striking concession from
Chomsky: it humanist knows.

just might turn out, as Schank thought, that the human capacity to
comprehend conversation (and, more generally, to think) was to be
explained in Sweet is the lore which Nature brings,

terms of the interaction of hundreds or thousands of jerry-built gizmos, but
Our meddling intellect Misshapes the

that would be a shame, for then psychology would prove in the end not to
be beauteous forms of things:—

"interesting." There were only two interesting possibilities, in Chomsky's
We murder to dissect.

mind: psychology could turn out to be "like physics"—its regularities
Wordsworth's Romantic view of the scientist as murderer of beauty seemed
explainable as the consequences of a few deep, elegant, inexorable laws—
or perfectly embodied by Noam Chomsky, automata theorist and Radio
psychology could turn out to be utterly lacking in laws—in which case the
Engineer, but it is a great irony that he was all along the champion of an
only way to study or expound psychology would be the novelist's way (and
attitude towards science that might seem to offer salvation to humanists. As
he much preferred Jane Austen to Roger Schank, if that were the
enterprise).

OceanofPDF.com

we saw in the previous section, Chomsky has argued that science has limits,
A vigorous debate ensued among the panelists and audience, capped by an
and, in particular, it stubs its toe on the mind. Discerning the shape of this
observation from Chomsky's colleague at MIT Marvin Minsky: "I think
only a humanities professor at MIT could be so oblivious to the third
'interesting'

curious fact has long been difficult, even for those who can handle the
possibility: psychology could turn out to be like engineering." Minsky had
technicalities and controversies of contemporary linguistics, but it has long
put his finger on it. There is something about the prospect of an engineering
been marveled at. Chomsky's notorious review ( 1959) slamming B. F.
Skin-approach to the mind that is deeply repugnant to a certain sort of
humanist, ner's Verbal Behavior (1957) was one of the founding documents
of cognitive and it has little or nothing to do with a distaste for materialism
or science.

science. At the same time, Chomsky has been unwaveringly hostile to
Chomsky was himself a scientist, and presumably a materialist (his
Artificial Intelligence, and has been so bold as to entitle one of his major

"Cartesian" linguistics did not go that far! ), but he would have no truck
with books Cartesian Linguistics (1966)—almost as if he thought the
antiengineering. It was somehow beneath the dignity of the mind to be a
gadget materialistic dualism of Descartes was going to come back in style.
Whose or a collection of gadgets. Better the mind should turn out to be an
side was he on, anyway? Not on Darwin's side, in any case. If Darwin-
impenetrable mystery, an inner sanctum for chaos, than that it should turn
out dreaders want a champion who is himself deeply and influentially
enmeshed to be the sort of entity that might yield its secrets to an
engineering analysis!

within science itself, they could not do better than Chomsky.

Though I was struck at the time by Minsky's observation about Chomsky,
This was certainly slow to dawn on me. In March 1978, I hosted a re-the
message didn't sink in. In 1980, Chomsky published "Rules and Repre-

markable debate at Tufts, staged, appropriately, by the Society for
Philosophy sentations" as a target article in Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
and I was and Psychology.7 Nominally a panel discussion on the
foundations and among the commentators. The contentious issue, then and
now, was Chom-prospects of Artificial Intelligence, it turned into a tag-
team rhetorical wres-sky's insistence that language competence was largely
innate, not something tling match between four heavyweight ideologues:
Noam Chomsky and Jerry that a child could properly be said to learn.
According to Chomsky, the Fodor attacking AI, and Roger Schank and
Terry Winograd defending it.

structure of language is mostly fixed in the form of innately specified rules,
Schank was working at the time on programs for natural language com-and
all the child does is set a few rather peripheral "switches" that turn him
prehension, and the critics focused on his scheme for representing (in a into
an English-speaker instead of a Chinese-speaker. Chomsky says the
computer) the higgledy-piggledy collection of trivia we all know and some-
child is not a sort of general-purpose learner—a "General Problem Solver,"

how rely on when deciphering ordinary speech acts, allusive and truncated
as Newell and Simon would say—who must figure out what language is
and learn to engage in it. Rather, the child is innately equipped to speak and
7. This account is drawn, with revisions, from Dennett 1988a.

388 LOSING OUR MINDS TO DARWIN

Chomsky Contra Darwin: Four Episodes 389

understand a language, and merely has to rule out certain (very limited)
esting," he couldn't see how there might be something "disheartening" to
possibilities and rule in certain others. That's why it is so effortless,
according psychologists in the discovery that they might have to pass the
buck to to Chomsky, for even "slow" children to learn to speak. They aren't
really biology- Years later, I finally realized that the reason he didn't see
what I was learning at all, any more than birds learn their feathers.
Language, and driving at was that although he insisted that the "language
organ" was innate, feathers, just develop in species ordained to have them,
and are off limits to this did not mean to him that it was a product of natural

selection! Or at least species that lack the innate equipment. A few
developmental triggers set the not in such a way as to permit biologists to
pick up the buck and analyze the language-acquisition process in motion,
and a few environmental conditions way in which the environment of our
ancestors had shaped the design of the subsequently do some minor pruning
or shaping, into whichever mother language organ over the eons. The
language organ, Chomsky thought, was tongue the child encounters.

not an adaptation, but . . . a mystery, or a hopeful monster. It was something
This claim has encountered enormous resistance, but we can now be sure
that perhaps would be illuminated some day by physics, but not by biology.

that the truth lies much closer to Chomsky's end of the table than to that of
his opponents (for the details, see the defenses of Chomsky's position in It
may be that at some remote period a mutation took place that gave rise
Jackendoff 1993 and Pinker 1994). Why the resistance? In my BBS com-to
the property of discrete infinity, perhaps for reasons that have to do with
mentary—which I presented as a constructive observation, not an objection
—

the biology of cells, to be explained in terms of properties of physical I
pointed out that there was one reason to resist this that was perfectly
mechanisms, now unknown __ Quite possibly other aspects of its evolu
reasonable, even if it was only a reasonable hope. Just like the biologists'

tionary development again reflect the operation of physical laws applying
resistance to "Hoyle's Howler," the hypothesis that life didn't begin on Earth
to a brain of a certain degree of complexity. [ 1988, p. 170.) but began
somewhere else and migrated here, the psychologists' resistance to
Chomsky's challenge had a benign explanation: if Chomsky was right, it
How could this be? Many linguists and biologists have tackled the prob-
would just make the phenomena of language and language acquisition that
lems of the evolution of language, using the same methods that have
worked much harder to investigate. Instead of finding the learning process
going on well on other evolutionary puzzles, and getting results, or at least
what seem before our eyes in individual children, where we could study it
and manip-to be results. For instance, at the most empirical end of the
spectrum, work by ulate it, we would have to "pass the buck to biology" and

hope that the neuroanatomists and psycholinguists has shown that our
brains have features biologists could explain how our species "learned" to
have language com-lacking in the brains of our closest surviving relatives,
features that play petences built in at birth. This was a much less tractable
research program. In crucial roles in language perception and language
production. There is a wide the case of Hoyle's hypothesis, one could
imagine

diversity of opinion about when in the last six million years or so our
lineage acquired these traits, in what order, and why, but these
disagreements are as arguments that fixed a maximal speed of mutation and
selection and amenable to further research—no better and no worse off—
than showed that there had not been enough time on Earth for the whole
disagreements about whether the archaeopteryx flew, for instance. On the
process to have occurred locally.

purely theoretical front, and casting the net much more widely, conditions
for Chomsky's arguments, from the poverty of the stimulus and the speed of
the evolution of communication systems in general have been deduced
(e.g., language acquisition, are analogous; they purport to show that there
must Krebs and Dawkins 1984, Zahavi 1987), and the implications are
being have been large gifts of design in the infant if we are to explain the
speedy explored in simulation models and empirical experiments.

development of the mature competence. And while we can take solace in
We saw in chapter 7 some of the ingenious speculations and models that the
supposition that we may someday be able to confirm the presence of have
been directed at the problem about how life bootstrapped itself into these
innate structures by direct examination of the nervous system (like finding
fossils of our extraterrestrial ancestors), we will have to accept the
existence, and there is a similar bounty of clever ideas about how language
disheartening conclusion that a larger portion than we had hoped of learn-
must have got going. There is no question that the origin of language is ing
theory, considered in its most general form as the attempt to explain
theoretically a much easier problem than the origin of life; we have such a
the transition from utter ignorance to knowledge, is not the province of rich

catalogue of not-so-raw materials with which to build an answer. We
psychology at all, but rather of evolutionary biology at its most speculative.

may never be able to confirm the details, but if so this will not be a mystery

[Dennett 1980.]

but only a bit of irreparable ignorance. Some particularly abstemious
scientists may be reluctant to devote time and attention to such far-flung To
my surprise, Chomsky missed the point of my commentary. Whereas
exercises in deductive speculation, but that does not appear to be Chom-he
himself had offered reflections on what would make psychology "inter-390
LOSING OUR MINDS TO DARWIN

Chomsky Contra Darwin: Four Episodes 391

sky's position. His reservations are directed not to the likelihood of success
occurred that jogged our ancestors abruptly to the right in Design Space, it
but to the very point of the enterprise.

was still a gradual design development under the pressure of natural
selection---unless it was indeed a miracle or a hopeful monster. In short,
although It is perfectly safe to attribute this development [of innate
language struc-Gould has heralded Chomsky's theory of universal grammar
as a bulwark tures] to "natural selection", so long as we realize that there is
no sub-against an adaptationist explanation of language, and Chomsky has
in return stance to mis assertion, that it amounts to nothing more than a
belief that endorsed Gould's antiadaptationism as an authoritative excuse for
rejecting there is some naturalistic explanation for these phenomena.
[Chomsky the obvious obligation to pursue an evolutionary explanation of
the innate 1972, p. 97.]

establishment of universal grammar, these two authorities are supporting
each other over an abyss.

In December 1989, the MIT psycholinguist Steven Pinker and his graduate
There have long been signs, then, of Chomsky's agnosticism—or even
student Paul Bloom presented a paper, "Natural Language and Natural

antagonism—towards Darwinism, but many of us have found them hard to
Selection," to the Cognitive Science Colloquium at MIT. Their paper, which
interpret. To some, he appeared to be a "crypto-creationist," but that didn't
has itself subsequently appeared as a target article in Behavioral and Brain
seem very plausible, especially since he had the endorsement of Stephen
Jay Sciences, laid down the gauntlet:

Gould. Remember the linguist Jay Keyser's appeal (on page 279) to Gould's
term "spandrel" to describe how language came to be? Keyser probably got
Many people have argued that the evolution of the human language faculty
his terminology from his colleague Chomsky, who got it from Gould, who
in cannot be explained by Darwinian natural selection. Chomsky and Gould
return has avidly endorsed Chomsky's view that language didn't really
evolve have suggested that language may have evolved as the by-product of
se-but just rather suddenly arrived, an inexplicable gift, at best a byproduct
of lection for other abilities or as a consequence of as-yet unknown laws of
the enlargement of the human brain.

growth and form.... [W]e conclude that there is every reason to believe mat
a specialization for grammar evolved by a conventional neo-Darwinian Yes,
the brain got big by natural selection. But as a result of this size, and
process. [Pinker and Bloom 1990, p. 707]

the neural density and connectivity thus imparted, human brains could
perform an immense range of functions quite unrelated to the original

"In one sense," Pinker and Bloom said (p. 708), "our goal is incredibly
reasons for increase in bulk. The brain did not get big so that we could read
boring. All we argue is that language is no different from other complex or
write or do arithmetic or chart the seasons—yet human culture, as we
abilities such as echolocation and stereopsis, and that the only way to
explain know it, depends upon skills of this kind.... [T]he universals of
language the origin of such abilities is through the theory of natural
selection." They are so different from anything else in nature, and so quirky
in their struc-arrived at this "incredibly boring" conclusion by a patient
evaluation of ture, that origin as a side consequence of the brain's enhanced
capacity, various analyses of multifarious phenomena that show beyond a
reasonable rather than as a simple advance in continuity from ancestral

grunts and doubt—surprise, surprise—that the "language organ" must
indeed have gestures, seems indicated. (This argument about language is by
no means evolved many of its most interesting properties as adaptations,
just as any original with me, though I ally myself fully with it; this line of
reasoning neo-Darwinian would expect. The response from the audience at
MIT was follows directly as the evolutionary reading for Noam Chomsky's
theory of anything but boring, however. Chomsky and Gould had been
scheduled to universal grammar.) [Gould 1989b, p. 14.]

reply, so there was a standing-room-only crowd.8 The level of hostility and
ignorance about evolution that was unabashedly expressed by Gould
stresses that the brain's growth may not have been due initially to selection
for language (or even for heightened intelligence) and that human language
may not have developed "as a simple advance in continuity from ancestral
grunts," but it does not follow from these suppositions (which we 8. As it
turned out, Chomsky was unable to attend, and his place was taken by his
(and may grant him for the sake of argument) that the language organ is not
an my) good friend Massimo Piatelli-Palmarini (who almost always agrees
with Chomsky, adaptation. It is, let us grant, an exaptation, but exaptations
are adaptations.

and seldom agrees with me!). Piatelli-Palmarini was die optimal
understudy; he had Let the remarkable growth of the hominid brain be a
"spandrel" in whatever cotaught a seminar on cognition and evolution with
Gould at Harvard, and was die author sense Gould or Keyser wishes, and
still the language organ will be as much of the article (1989) that had first
rendered explicit the Gould-Chomsky position on the nonevolution of
language. His article had been a major provocation and target of Pinker an
adaptation as the bird's wing! No matter how suddenly the punctuation and
Bloom's essay.

392 LOSING OUR MINDS TO DARWIN

Nice Tries 393

eminent cognitive scientists on that occasion shocked me. (In fact, it was of
battle. (As we shall see, this is everybody's weakness; I regret that the
reflecting on that meeting that persuaded me I could no longer put off

writing siege mentality among sociobiologists has led them to overlook—at
any rate, this book.) So far as I know, no transcript of that meeting exists
(the neglect to correct—more than a few cases of egregiously bad reasoning
by commentaries in BBS include some of the themes raised at the meeting),
but members of their own team.)

you can recover something of the flavor by contemplating Pinker's list One
of Darwin's most enthusiastic supporters was Herbert Spencer, coiner
(personal communication) of the ten most amazing objections he and
Bloom of the phrase "the survival of the fittest" and an important clarifier of
some of have fielded since drafts of their paper began to circulate. Versions
of most of Darwin's best ideas, but also the father of Social Darwinism, an
odious them, if memory serves me, were expressed at the MIT meeting:
misapplication of Darwinian thinking in defense of political doctrines that
range from callous to heinous.9 Was Darwin responsible for Spencer's
misuse (1) Color vision has no function; we could tell red from green apples
of his views? Opinions differ on this. For my part, I excuse Darwin from the
using intensity cues.

truly heroic task of chastising his champion in public, even though I regret
(2) Language is not designed for communication at all: it's not like a that he
wasn't more energetic in pursuing private acts of dissuasion or watch, it's
like a Rube Goldberg device with a stick in the middle that correction. Both
Gould and Chomsky have been vigorous proponents of the you can use as a
sundial.

view that intellectuals are responsible for the applications and likely (3)
Any argument that language is functional could be made with equal
misapplications of their own work, so presumably they are at least
plausibility and force when applied to writing in sand.

embarrassed to find themselves cited as the sources of all this nonsense, for
(4) The structure of the cell is to be explained by physics, not evolution.

they themselves do not hold these views. (It is perhaps too much to expect
(5) Having an eye calls for the same kind of explanation as having mass,
their gratitude to me for doing their dirty work for them.) because just as the
eye lets you see, mass prevents you from floating into space.

(6) Hasn't that stuff about insect wings refuted Darwin?

3. NICE TRIES

(7) Language can't be useful; it's led to war.

(8) Natural selection is irrelevant, because we now have chaos theory.

In studying the evolution of mind, we cannot guess to what extent there (9)
Language couldn't have evolved through selection pressure for com-are
physically possible alternatives to, say, transformational generative
munication, because we can ask people how they feel without really
grammar, for an organism meeting certain other physical conditions
wanting to know.

characteristic of humans. Conceivably, there are none— or very few— in
(10) Everyone agrees that natural selection plays some role in the origin of
which case talk about evolution of the language capacity is beside the the
mind but that it cannot explain every aspect—thus there is point.

nothing more to say.

—NOAM CHOMSKY 1972, p. 98

Are Gould and Chomsky responsible for the bizarre convictions of some of
their supporters? This question has no simple answer. More than half of the
items on Pinker's list have a clear ancestry in claims that have been made by
9. Spencer's woolly style was the target of William James' mockery in the
epigraph for part II (p. 147). Spencer (1870, p. 396) had offered the
following definition: "Evolution Gould (numbers 2, 6, and 9 in particular)
and Chomsky (numbers 4, 5, and 10

is an integration of matter and concomitant dissipation of motion; during
which the in particular). Those who make these claims (including the others
on the list) matter passes from an indefinite, incoherent homogeneity to a
definite, coherent heter-typically present them on the authority of Gould
and Chomsky (see, e.g., ogeneity; and during which the retained motion
undergoes a parallel transformation."

Otero 1990). As Pinker and Bloom say (1990, p. 708), "Noam Chomsky,
the The memeology of James' marvelous parody is worth recording. I got
the quotation from world's greatest linguist, and Stephen Jay Gould, the
world's best-known Garrett Hardin, who informs me that he got it from Sills
and Merton (1991, p. 104). They in turn cite James' Lecture Notes 1880-
1897 as their source, but Hardin has tracked evolutionary theorist, have
repeatedly suggested that language may not be the down some further
details. P. G. Tait (1880, p. 80 ) gives credit to a mathematician named
product of natural selection." Moreover—two important dogs that haven't
Kirkman for his "exquisite translation" of Spencer, of which James' version
—presumably barked—I have yet to witness either Gould or Chomsky
attempting to correct borrowed from Tait—is a mutation. Kirkman's
(presumably ) original version: "Evolution these howlers when they arise in
the heat

is a change from a nohowish, untalkaboutable all-alikeness, to a
somehowish and in-general-talkaboutable, not-all-alikeness, by continuous
somethingelsifications and sticktogetherations."

394 LOSING OUR MINDS TO DARWIN

Nice Tries 395

To make progress in understanding all this, we probably need to begin
complexities to be found in organisms. Gould and Lewontin's ( 1979) brief
with simplified (oversimplified?) models and ignore the critics' tirade
alliance with "intrinsic" Baupläne that account for all but the minor trim-
that the real world is more complex. The real world is always more mings
of organism design is yet another.

complex, which has the advantage that we shan't run out of work.

Chomsky's suggestion that it is physics, not biology (or engineering), that

—JOHN BALL 1984, p. 159

will account for the structure of the language organ is as pure an anti-
Spencerian doctrine as you could find. This explains his misconstrual of my

The problem here is how to get the pendulum to stop swinging back and
friendly suggestion about passing the buck to biology. I was assuming, as a
forth so destructively. Time and again we see the same failure of commu-
good Spencerian adaptationist, that "genes are the channel through which
the nication. The truly unfortunate communication gap that Simon and
Kaplan environment speaks," as Godfrey-Smith puts it, whereas Chomsky
prefers to speak of (in their quotation at the head of the previous section) is
the think of the genes' getting their message from some intrinsic, ahis-
torical, amplified effect of a relatively simple bit of initial
misunderstanding. Recall nonenvironmental source of organization
—"physics," we may call it the difference between reductionists and greedy
reductionists (chapter 3, Spencerians think that even if there are such
timeless "laws of form," they section 5): reductionists think everything in
nature can all be explained could impose themselves on things only through
some selectional process or without skyhooks; greedy reductionists think it
can all be explained without other.

cranes. But one theorist's healthy optimism is another theorist's unseemly
Evolutionary thinking is just one chapter in the history of Spencerian-greed.
One side proposes an oversimple crane, at which the other side versus-anti-
Spencerian thinking. Adaptationism is a Spencerian doctrine, and scoffs
—"Philistine reductionists!"—declaring, truthfully, that life is much so is
Skinner's behaviorism, and so, more generally, is any variety of more
complicated than that. "Bunch of crazy skyhook-seekers!" mutters the
empiricism. Empiricism is the view that we furnish our minds with details
first side, in defensive overreaction. That is what they would mutter if they
that all come from the outside environment, via experience. Adaptationism
is had the term—but, then again, if both sides had the terms, they might be
able the view that the selecting environment gradually shapes the genotypes
of to see what the issues really were, and avoid the miscommunication
organisms, molding them so that the phenotypes they command are some
altogether. That is my hope.

near-optimal fit with the encountered world. Behaviorism is the view that
What are Chomsky's actual views? If he doesn't think the language organ is
what Skinner (1953, especially pp. 129-41) called "the controlling envi-
shaped by natural selection, what account does he give of its complexities?

ronment" is what "shapes" the behavior of all organisms. Now we can see
The philosopher of biology Peter Godfrey-Smith (1993) has recently
focused that Chomsky's famous attack on Skinner was as much an attack on
Skinner's on the family of views that maintain, in one way or another, that
"there is Spencerian view that the environment shaped the organism as it
was on the complexity in the organism in virtue of complexity in the
environment."

limitations of Skinner's model of how this shaping took place.

Since this was one of Herbert Spencer's pet themes, Godfrey-Smith
proposes Skinner proclaimed that one simple iteration of the fundamental
Dar-we call any such view "Spencerian."10 Spencer was a Darwinian—or
you winian process—operant conditioning—could account for all mentality,
all could say that Charles Darwin was a Spencerian. In any event, the
modern learning, not just in pigeons but in human beings. When critics
insisted that synthesis is Spencerian to its core, and it is the Spencer-ism of
that orthodoxy thinking and learning were much, much more complicated
than that, he (and that is most often attacked in one way or another by
rebels. Manfred Eigen his followers) smelled skyhooks, and wrote off the
critics of behaviorism as and Jacques Monod are both Spencerian, for
instance, in their insistence that dualists, mentalists, antiscientinc know-
nothings. This was a mis-perception; it is only through environmental
selection that molecular function can be the critics—at least the best of
them—were simply insisting that the mind specified (chapter 7, section 2;
chapter 8, section 3 ), whereas Stuart was composed of a lot more cranes
than Skinner imagined.

Kauffman's insistence that order emerges in spite of( envi-ronmental)
Skinner was a greedy reductionist, trying to explain all the design (and
selection expresses an anti-Spencerian challenge (chapter 8, section 7).
Brian design power) in a single stroke. The proper response to him should
have Goodwin's denial (1986) that biology is a historical science is another
been: "Nice try—but it turns out to be much more complicated than you
example of anti-Spencerism, since it is a denial that historical interactions
think!" And one should have said it without sarcasm, for Skinner's was a
nice with earlier environments are the source of the try. It was a great idea,

which inspired (or provoked) a half-century of hardheaded experimentation
and model-building from which a great deal was learned. Ironically, it was
the repeated failures of another brand of greedy 10. It is also one of Herbert
Simon's pet themes in Sciences of the Artificial ( 1969 ), so reductionism,
dubbed "Good Old-Fashioned AI" or "GOFAI" by Haugeland we might call
it Simonian—or Herbertian.

(1985), that really convinced psychologists that the mind was 396 LOSING
OUR MINDS TO DARWIN

Nice Tries 397

indeed a phenomenon of surpassing architectural complexity—much too
made possible such pioneers as Donald Hebb ( 1949) and Frank Rosenblatt
complicated for behaviorism to describe. The founding insight of GOFAI
was ( 1962 ), whose "Perceptrons" were, as Minsky and Papert soon pointed
out Turing's recognition that a computer could be indefinitely compli cated
but ( 1969), a nice try, but much too simple. Now, several decades later,
another that all computers could be made from simple parts. Whereas
Skinner's wave of more complicated but still usefully simple nice tries,
flying the flag simple parts had been randomly mated stimulus-response
pairings that could of Connectionism, are exploring portions of Design
Space left unexamined then be subjected, over and over again, to the
selection pressure of by their intellectual ancestors.12

reinforcement from the environment, Turing's simple parts were internal
data-The human mind is an amazing crane, and there is a lot of design work
that structures—different "machine states" that could be composed to
respond has to have been done to build it, and to keep it working and up-to-
date now.

differentially to indefinitely many different inputs, creating input output
That is Darwin's "Spencerian" message. One way or another, the history of
behavior of any imaginable sophistication. Which of these internal states
environmental encounters over the eons (and during the last ten minutes)
has were innately specified and which were to be revised by experience was
shaped the mind you have right now. Some of the work must have been
done something left to be investigated. Like Charles Babbage ( see note 13

of by natural selection, and the rest by one or another internal generate-and-
test chapter 8), Turing saw that the behavior of an entity need not be any
simple process of the sort we looked at earlier in the chapter. None of it is
magic; function of its own history of stimulation, since it could have
accrued huge none of it involves an internal skyhook. Whatever models we
propose of amounts of design over the eons, which would permit it to use
its internal these cranes will surely be too simple in one regard or another,
but we are complexity to mediate its responses. That abstract opening was
eventually closing in, trying out the simple ideas first. Chomsky has been
one of the filled by GOFAI-modelers with contrivances of dazzling
complexity that still leading critics of these nice tries, dismissing everyone
from B. F. Skinner, fell comically short of producing human-style
cognition.

through such GOFAI mavens and mavericks as Herbert Simon and Roger
Today the reigning orthodoxy in cognitive science is that yesterday's
Schank, to all the Connectionists, and he has always been right that their
simple models of perception, learning, memory, language production, and
ideas have been too simple by far, but he has also exhibited a hostility to the
language understanding are orders of magnitude too simple, but those
simple tactic of trying for simple models that has unduly raised the
temperature of models were often nice tries, without which we would still
be wondering how the debates. Suppose, for the sake of argument, we grant
that Chomsky could simple it might, after all, turn out to be. It makes sense
to err on the side of see better than anyone else that the mind, and the
language organ which plays greedy reductionism, to try for the simple
model before wallowing around in such a central role in its superiority over
animal minds, are structures of a complexities. Mendel's simple genetics
was a nice try, and so was the rather systematicity and complexity that
beggar all models to date. All the more more complex "bean-bag genetics"
it became in the hands of population reason, one would think, to search for
an evolutionary explanation of these geneticists, even though it has often
relied on such retrospectively outrageous brilliant devices. But although
Chomsky uncovered for us the abstract oversimplifications that Francis
Crick was tempted to kick it out of science.

structure of language, the crane that is most responsible for lifting all the
Graham Cairns-Smith's clay crystals are a nice try, and Art Samuel's other
cranes of culture into place, he has vigorously discouraged us from
checkers-player was a nice try—much too simple, as we learned, but on the
treating it as a crane. No wonder yearners for skyhooks have often taken
him right track.

as their authority.

In the earliest days of the computer, Warren McCulloch and W. H. Pitts He
is not the only candidate, however. John Searle is another favorite (1943 )
proposed a magnificently simple "logical neuron" from which "neural
champion of skyhook-seekers, and he is certainly no Chomskian. We saw in
nets" might be woven, and for a while it looked as if perhaps they had
broken the back of the brain problem. Certainly, before they made their
modest proposal, neurologists were desperately confused about how to
think of the (1964 ) inspired me when I was a graduate student, and whose
later work (e.g., 1989 ) has brain's activity. One has only to go back and
read their brave flounderings, in persistently carved out new territories, still
underappreciated by many in the trenches, the more speculative books of
the 1930s and 1940s, to see what a tremendous and on the outskirts, in my
opinion.

lift neuroscience got from McCulloch and Pitts.l' They 12. Other nice tries
have been the neuroscientists' many models of learning as "Darwin-Jan"
evolution in the nervous system, going back to the early work of Ross
Ashby ( I960) and J. Z. Young (1965), and continuing today in the work of
such people as Arbib, Grossberg (1976), Changeux and Danchin (1976),
and Calvin (1987)—and Edelman 11. One of Warren McCulloch's students,
himself a major contributor to these early (1987), whose work would be a
nicer try if he didn't present it as if it were such a developments, is Michael
Arbib, whose crystal-clear early discussion of these issues saltation in the
wilderness.

398 LOSING OUR MINDS TO DARWIN

Nice Tries 399

chapter 8 (section 4) that Searle has defended a version of John Locke's
That is certainly biting the bullet, and biting the same bullet as Chomsky,
Mind-first vision, under the banner of Original Intentionality. According to
but in a somewhat different spot: Yes of course, the LAD evolved, and so
did Searle, automata (computers or robots) don't have real intentionality; at
best consciousness (Searle 1992, pp. 88ff.), but Chomsky is right that there
is no they have mere as if intentionality. Moreover, original or real
intentionality hope of a reverse-engineering account of either of them.
Chomsky is wrong, cannot be composed of, derived from—or, presumably,
descended from—

however, to grant even the coherence of an automaton-level description of
mere as if intentionality. This creates a problem for Searle, because,
whereas the process, for that opens the door to "strong Artificial
Intelligence."

Artificial Intelligence says you are composed of automata, Darwinism says
If Chomsky's position on the slippery slope is hard to maintain, Searle's you
are descended from automata. It is hard to deny the former if you admit has
even more awkward consequences.13 He grants, as we can see in the the
latter; how could anything born of automata ever be anything but a much,
passage quoted above, that there is a "functional" story to be told about how
much fancier automaton? Do we somehow reach escape velocity and leave
the brain does its work in language acquisition. There is also, he grants, a
our automaton heritage behind? Is there some threshold that marks the onset

"functional" story to be told about how parts of the brain arrive at depth or
of real intentionality? Chomsky's original hierarchy of ever fancier
automata distance judgments in vision. "But there is no mental content
whatever at this permitted him to draw the line, showing that the minimal
complexity of an functional level" (Searle 1992, p. 234, Searle's emphasis).
He then puts to automaton capable of generating the sentences of a human
language puts it in himself the following quite reasonable retort from the
cognitive scientists: a special class—still a class of automata, but at least an
advanced class. This

"the distinction [between "function" talk and "mental content" talk] does not
was not quite enough for Chomsky. As we have just seen, he planted his

feet really make much difference to cognitive science. We continue to say
what and said, in effect: "Yes, language makes the difference—but don't try
to we have always said and do what we have always done, we simply
substitute explain how the language organ got designed. It's a hopeful
monster, a gift, the word 'functional' for the word 'mental' in these cases."
(This is in fact nothing that could ever be explained." An awkward position
to maintain: the what Chomsky has often said, in reply to such criticisms.
See, for instance, brain is an automaton, but not one we can reverse-
engineer. Is this perhaps a 1980.) To answer this retort, Searle (1992, p.
238) is obliged to take a step tactical mistake? According to Searle,
Chomsky took one step too many backwards himself: not only is there no
information-processing level of before planting his feet. He should have
denied that the language organ had a explanation for the brain, he says;
there is also really no "functional level" of structure that could even be
described in automaton terms at all. By lapsing explanation in biology:

into information-processing talk, talk about rules and representations and
algorithmic transformations, Chomsky had given a hostage to the reverse
To put the point bluntly, in addition to its various causal relations, the
engineers. Perhaps Chomsky's heritage as a Radio Engineer is coming back
heart does not have any functions. When we speak of its functions, we are
to haunt him:

talking about those of its causal relations to which we attach some nor
mative importance __ In short, the actual facts of intentionality contain
normative elements, but where functional explanations are concerned, the
Specifically, the evidence for universal grammar is much more simply only
facts are brute, blind physical facts and the only norms are in us and
accounted for by the following hypothesis: There is, indeed, a language
exist only from our point of view.

acquisition device [LAD] innate in human brains, and LAD constrains the
form of languages that human beings can learn. There is, thus, a hardware It
turns out, then, that function talk in biology, like mere as if-intentionality
level of explanation in terms of the structure of the device, and there is a
functional level of explanation, describing which sorts of languages can be
talk, is not really to be taken seriously after all. According to Searle, only

acquired by the human infant in the application of this mechanism. No
artifacts made by genuine, conscious human artificers have real functions.

further predictive or explanatory power is added by saying that there is in
Airplane wings are really for flying, but eagles' wings are not. If one
biologist addition a level of deep unconscious rules of universal grammar,
and in-says they are adaptations for flying and another says they are merely
display deed, I have tried to suggest that that postulation is incoherent
anyway.

racks for decorative feathers, there is no sense in which one biologist is

[Searle 1992, pp. 244-45.]

closer to the truth. If, on the other hand, we ask the aeronautical engineers
whether the airplane wings they designed are for keeping the plane aloft or
According to Searle, the whole idea of information processing in the brain,
for displaying the insignia of the airline, they can tell us a brute fact. So
described abstractly in terms of algorithms that exhibit substrate neutrality,
is incoherent. "There are brute, blind neurophysiological processes and
there is consciousness, but there is nothing else" (Searle 1992, p. 228).

13. The remainder of this section draws on my review of Searle's book
(Dennett 1993c).

400 LOSING OUR MINDS TO DARWIN

Searle ends up denying William Paley's premise: according to Searle, nature
does not consist of an unimaginable variety of functioning devices,
exhibiting design. Only human artifacts have that honor, and only because
(as Locke

"showed" us) it takes a Mind to make something with a function!14 Searle
CHAPTER FOURTEEN

insists that human minds have "Original" Intentionality, a property
unattainable in principle by any R-and-D process of building better and
better The Evolution of

algorithms. This is a pure expression of the belief in skyhooks: minds are
original and inexplicable sources of design, not results of design. He
defends this position more vividly than other philosophers, but he is not
alone. The Meanings

hostility to Artificial Intelligence and its evil twin, Darwinism, lies just
beneath the surface of much of the most influential work in recent
twentieth-century philosophy, as we shall see in the next chapter.

CHAPTER 13: When generate-and-test, the basic move in any Darwinian
algorithm, moves into the brains of individual organisms, it builds a series
of ever more powerful systems, culminating in the defiberate, foresightful
generation and testing of hypotheses and theories by human beings. This
process creates minds that show no signs of "cognitive closure," thanks to
their 1. THE QUEST FOR REAL MEANING

capacity to generate and comprehend language. Noam Chomsky, who
created contemporary linguistics by proving that language was generated
by an

"When I use a word," Humpty Dumpty said, in a radier scornful tone, innate
automaton, has nevertheless resisted all evolutionary accounts of how

"it means just what I choose it to mean— neither more nor less."

and why the language automaton got designed and installed, and has also

"The question is," said Alice, "whether you can make words mean so
resisted all Artificial Intelligence attempts to model language use. Chomsky
many different tilings. "

has stood firm against (reverse) engineering, flanked by Gould on one side

"The question is," said Humpty Dumpty, "which is to be master—

and Searle on the other, exemplifying the resistance to the spread of
Darwin's that's all."

dangerous idea, and holding out for the human mind as a skyhook.

—LEWIS CARROLL 1871

CHAPTER 14: In chapter 8, 1 sketched an evolutionary account of the
birth of There is no topic in philosophy that has received more attention
than meaning, which will now be expanded and defended against the
skeptical meaning, in its multifarious manifestations. At the grand end of
the spec-challenges of philosophers. A series of thought experiments
building on the trum, philosophers of all schools have grappled with the
ultimate question of concepts introduced in earlier chapters shows not just
the coherence but the the meaning of life (and whether or not this question
has any meaning). At inevitability of an evolutionary theory of meaning.

the modest end, philosophers of the contemporary analytic school—

sometimes called "linguistic philosophy" by outsiders—have subjected the
nuances of the meaning of words and whole utterances to microscopic
scrutiny, in a variety of quite distinct enterprises. Back in the 1950s and
1960s, the school of "ordinary language philosophy" lavished attention on
14. Given Searle's position on this, one would predict that he should be
utterly opposed the subtle differences between particular words—the
differences between to my analysis of the power of adaptationist thinking,
as presented in chapter 9. He is. I doing something "deliberately" or
"intentionally" or "on purpose," to cite a don't know whether he has
expressed this view in print, but in several debates with me famous instance
(Austin 1961). This gave way to a more formal and sys-

(Rutgers, 1986; Buenos Aires, 1989), he has expressed the view that my
account is tematic set of investigations. Which different propositions could
you mean exactly backward: the idea that one can hunt for the "free-floating
rationales" of evolu-by uttering such sentences as

tionary selection processes is, in his view, a travesty of Darwinian thinking.
One of us has unintentionally refuted himself; the identity of the victim is
left as an exercise for the reader.

Tom believes that Ortcutt is a spy.

402 THE EVOLUTION OF MEANINGS

The Quest for Real Meaning 403

And what theory accounts for their differences in presupposition, context,
claims do not succumb to the blanket denunciation of greedy reductionism
and implication? This sort of question is pursued by the subschool that has
that was heaped on Skinner and all behaviorists by die ascendant cognitiv-
sometimes been called the "prepositional attitude task force," of which
some ists, under the direction of Chomsky and Fodor. l Sellars, the father of
"func-exemplary recent efforts are Peacocke 1992 and Richard 1992. A
different set tionalism" in the philosophy of mind, said all the right things,
but in difficult of investigations was inaugurated by Paul Grice's (1957,
1969) theory of language that was largely ignored by the cognitivists. (See
Dennett 1987b,

"non-natural meaning." This was the attempt to specify the conditions under
ch. 10, for a historical account.) Earlier, John Dewey made it clear that
which a bit of behavior had not just natural meaning (where there's smoke,
Darwinism should be assumed to be the foundation of any naturalistic
theory there's fire; when somebody cries, there's sadness), but the sort of
meaning of meaning.

that a speech act has, with its element of conventionality. What has to be the
No account of the universe in terms merely of the redistribution of matter
state of a speaker's (or hearer's) mind for the utterance act to mean anything
in motion is complete, no matter how true as far as it goes, for it ignores at
all, or to mean a particular thing? Or, in other words, what is the the
cardinal fact that the character of matter in motion and of its redistri-
relationship between an agent's psychology and the meaning of an agent's
bution is such as cumulatively to achieve ends—to effect the world of
words? ( The relations between these two enterprises is perhaps best seen in
values we know. Deny this and you deny evolution; admit it and you admit
Schiffer 1987.)

purpose in the only objective—that is, the only intelligible—sense of that
An assumption shared by all these philosophical research programs is that
term. I do not say that in addition to the mechanism there are other ideal
there is one sort of meaning—perhaps divided into many different sub-
causes or factors which intervene. I only insist that the whole story be told,

sorts—that is language-dependent. Before there were words, there were no
that the character of the mechanism be noted—namely, that it is such as to
word meanings, even if there were other sorts of meanings. The further
produce and sustain good in a multiplicity of forms. [Dewey 1910, p. 34]

working assumption, particularly among English-speaking philosophers,
has Note how carefully Dewey wended his way between Scylla and
Charyb-been that until we get clear about how words can have meaning, we
are dis: no skyhooks ( "ideal causes or factors" ) are called for, but we must
not unlikely to make much progress on the other varieties of meaning,
especially suppose that we can make sense of an uninterpreted version of
evolution, an such staggering issues as the meaning of life. But this
reasonable assumption evolution with no functions endorsed, no meanings
discerned. More recently, has typically had an unnecessary and debilitating
side effect: by several other philosophers and I have articulated specifically
evolutionary concentrating first on linguistic meaning, philosophers have
distorted their accounts of the birth and maintenance of meaning, both
linguistic and vision of the minds these words depend on, treating them as
somehow sui prelinguistic (Dennett 1969, 1978, 1987b, Millikan 1984,
1993, Israel 1987, generis, rather than as themselves evolved products of
the natural world. This Papineau 1987). Ruth Millikan's account is by far
the most carefully is manifest especially in the resistance philosophers have
shown to articulated, bristling with implications about the details of the
other evolutionary theories of meaning, theories that purport to discern that
the philosophical approaches to meaning mentioned above. Her differ-ences
with meaning of words, and all the mental states that somehow lie behind
them, is my position have loomed larger for her than for me, but the gap is
closing grounded ultimately in the rich earth of biological function.

fast—see especially Millikan 1993, p. 155—and I expect the present book
to On the one hand, few if any philosophers have wanted to deny the
obvious close the gap further, but this is not the place to expose our
remaining fact: human beings are products of evolution, and their capacity
to speak, and differences, for they are minor in the context of a larger
skirmish, a battle we hence to mean anything (in the relevant sense ), is due
to a suite of specific have not yet won: the battle for any evolutionary
account of meaning.

adaptations not shared with other products of evolution. On the other hand,
philosophers have been reluctant to entertain the hypothesis that
evolutionary thinking might shed light on their specific problems about how
it is that words, and their sources and destinations in people's minds or
brains, have 1. Like the misguided fear among evolutionists that the
Baldwin Effect commits the sin of meaning. There have been important
exceptions. Willard Van Orman Quine Lamarckism, and Darwin's own
precipitous flight from Catastrophism, the indiscriminate (I960) and Wilfrid
Sellars (1963) each developed function-alistic theories of rejection of
anything that smacks of behaviorism by the "thoroughly modern mentalists"

(Fodor 1980) is an instance of misfiltered memes. See R. Richards 1987 for
an excellent meaning that had their roots firmly if sketchily planted in
biology. Quine, account of the distortions of such guilt-by-association in
early evolutionary thinking, and however, hitched his wagon too firmly to
the behaviorism espoused by his Dennett (1975; 1978, ch. 4) for attempts to
separate the wheat from the chaff of friend B. F. Skinner, and has been
dogged for thirty years with the problem behaviorism.

of persuading philosophers—with scant success—that his 404 THE
EVOLUTION OF MEANINGS

The Quest for Real Meaning 405

Opposed to us stand an eminent if unlikely bunch of bedfellows: Jerry eters
of the two-bitser's transducing machinery. In other words, it follows Fodor,
Hilary Putnam, John Searle, Saul Kripke, Tyler Burge, and Fred just as
directly from the laws of physics that objects of kind K would put the
Dretske, each in his own way opposed both to evolutionary accounts of
device into state Q as that quarters would. Objects of kind K would be good
meaning and to AI. All six of these philosophers have expressed their res-

"slugs"—reliably "fooling" the transducer.

ervations about AI, but Fodor has been particularly outspoken in his denun-
If objects of kind K became more common in the two-bitsers normal ciation
of evolutionary approaches to meaning. His diatribes against every
environment, we would expect the owners and designers of two-bitsers to

naturalist since Dewey (see especially Fodor 1990, ch. 2) are often quite
develop more advanced and sensitive transducers that would reliably dis-
funny. For instance, in ridiculing my view, he says (p. 87): "Teddy bears are
criminate between genuine U.S. quarters and slugs of kind K. Of course,
artificial, but real bears are artificial too. We stuff the one and Mother
trickier counterfeits might then make their appearance, requiring further
Nature stuffs the other. Philosophy is full of surprises."2

advances in the detecting transducers. At some point, such escalation of
Words, according to Humpty Dumpty, get their meanings from us, but
engineering would reach diminishing returns, for there is no such thing as a
whence do we get meaning? What exercises Fodor and these other philos-
foolproof mechanism. In the meantime, the engineers and users are wise to
ophers is a concern for real meaning as opposed to ersatz meaning, "in-
make do with standard, rudimentary two-bitsers, since it is not cost-
effective trinsic" or "original" intentionality as opposed to derived
intentionality. Well to protect oneself against negligible abuses.

might Fodor want to ridicule the idea of organisms as artifacts, for it
provides The only tiling that makes the device a quarter-detector rather than
a slug-the perspective from which the central flaw in his view, a flaw shared
by the detector or a quarter-or-slug-detector is the environment of shared
intentions views of the five others, can be exposed by a thought
experiment.3

of the artifacts designers, builders, owners—its users, in short. It is only in
Consider a soft-drink vending machine, designed and built in the United the
context of those users and their intentions that we can single out some of
States, and equipped with a standard transducer device for accepting and
the occasions of state Q as "veridical" and others as "mistaken." It is only
rejecting U.S. quarters. Let's call such a device a "two-bitser." Normally,
relative to that context of intentions that we could justify calling the device
a when a quarter is inserted into a two-bitser, it goes into a state, call it Q,
two-bitser in the first place.

which "means" (note the scare-quotes) "I perceive/accept a genuine U.S.

I take it that so far I have Fodor, Putnam, Searle, Kripke, Burge, and quarter
now." Such two-bitsers are quite "clever" and "sophisticated." (More
Dretske nodding their agreement: that's just how it is with such artifacts;
this scare-quotes; the thought experiment begins with the assumption that
this is a textbook case of derived intentionality, laid bare. Such an artifact
has no sort of intentionality is not the real thing, and ends by exposing the
intrinsic intentionality at all. And so it embarrasses no one to admit that a
embarrassments such an assumption entails.) Two-bitsers are hardly fool
particular two-bitser, straight from the American factory and with "Model A
proof, however; they do "make mistakes." To say the same thing unmeta-
Two-Bitser" stamped right on it, might be installed on a Panamanian soft-
phorically, sometimes they go into state Q when a slug or other foreign
drink machine, where it proceeded to earn its keep as an accepter and
rejecter object is inserted in them, and sometimes they reject perfectly legal
quar-of quarter-balboas, legal tender in Panama, and easily distinguished
from ters—they fail to go into state Q when they are supposed to. No doubt
there U.S. quarters by the design and writing stamped on them, but not by
their are detectable patterns in the cases of "misperception." No doubt at
least weight, thickness, diameter, or material composition. (I'm not making
this some of the cases of "misidentification" could be predicted by someone
with up. I have it on excellent authority—Albert Erler of the Flying Eagle
Shoppe, enough knowledge of the relevant laws of physics and design
param-Rare Coins—that Panamanian quarter-balboas minted between 1966
and 1984 are indistinguishable from U.S. quarters by standard vending
machines.

Small wonder, since they were struck from U.S. quarter stock in American
mints. And—to satisfy the curious, although it is strictly irrelevant to the
example—the exchange rate when last I checked for quarter-balboas was 2.
Read Fodor for amusement, and for insight into a dislike of Darwin's
dangerous idea so deep that it overrides the standard practice of attempting
to find a sympathetic reading indeed 8.25.)

of texts. His misrepresentation of Millikan is particularly egregious, and is
not to be Such a two-bitser, whisked off to Panama, would still normally go
into a trusted at all, but can be readily cured by reading Millikan herself.

certain physical state—the state with the physical features by which we
used 3. As usual, the issues are more complicated than 1 can show here; for
all the gory details, to identify state Q—whenever a U.S. quarter, an object
of kind K, or a see Dennett 1987b, ch. 8, from which this thought
experiment is drawn, and Dennett Panamanian quarter-balboa is inserted in
it, but now a different set of such 1990b, 1991c, 1991e, 1992.

occasions count as the mistakes. In the new environment, U.S. quarters 406
THE EVOLUTION OF MEANINGS

The Quest for Real Meaning 407

count as slugs, as inducers of error, misperception, misrepresentation, just
as balboas? (We could go on adding complications and variations, if it
might much as objects of kind K do. After all, back in the United States a
make a difference to our intuitions. Should it?)

Panamanian quarter-balboa is a kind of slug.

One thing is clear: there is absolutely nothing intrinsic about the two-bitser
Once our two-bitser is resident in Panama, should we say that the state we
considered narrowly all by itself (and its internal operations) that would
used to call Q still occurs? The physical state in which the device "accepts"

distinguish it from a genuine q-balber, made to order on commission from
coins still occurs, but should we now say that we should identify it as the
Panamanian government. What must make the difference, of course, is

"realizing" a new state—call it QB instead? At what point would we be
whether it was selected for its capacity to detect quarter-balboas (agreeing
entitled to say that the meaning, or the function, of this physical state of the
with Millikan 1984). If it was so selected (by its new owners, in the
simplest two-bitser had shifted? Well, there is considerable freedom—not to
say case), then even if they forget to reset the counter, its maiden move is
the boredom—about what we should say, since after all a two-bitser is just
an veridical acceptance of a quarter-balboa. "It works!" its new owners
might artifact; talking about its perceptions and misperceptions, its veridical
and exclaim delightedly. If, on the other hand, the two-bitser were sent to

Panama nonveridical states—its intentionality, in short—is "just metaphor."
The two-by mistake, or arrived by sheer coincidence, then its maiden move
would bitser's internal state, call it what you like, doesn't really (originally,
mean nothing, though it might soon come to be appreciated by those in the
intrinsically) mean either "U.S. quarter here now" or "Panamanian quarter-
vicinity for its power to tell quarter-balboas from the indigenous slugs, in
balboa here now." It doesn't really mean anything. That's what Fodor, Put-
which case it could come to function as a q-balber in the fullest meaning of
nam, Searle, Kripke, Burge, and Dretske ( inter alia) would insist.

that term, via a less official route. This, by the way, already makes a
problem The two-bitser was originally designed to be a detector of U.S.
quarters.

for Searle's view that only artifacts can have functions, and those are the
That was its "proper function" ( Millikan 1984 ) and, quite literally, its
raison functions its creators endow it with by their very special mental acts
of d'etre. No one would have bothered bringing it into existence had this
creation. The original designers of the two-bitser may have been entirely
purpose not occurred to them. This historic fact licenses a way of speaking:
oblivious of some later use to which it was opportunistically exapted, so
their we may call the thing a two-bitser, a thing whose function is to detect
intentions count for nothing. And the new selectors may also fail to
formulate quarters, so that relative to that function we can identify both its
veridical any specific intentions—they may just fall into the habit of relying
on the states and its errors.

two-bitser for some handy function, unaware of the act of unconscious This
would not prevent the two-bitser from being wrested from its original
exaptation they are jointly executing. Recall that Darwin, in Origin, already
niche and pressed (exapted) into new service—whatever new purpose the
drew attention to unconscious selection of traits in domestic animals; laws
of physics permit and circumstances favor. It could be used as a K-
unconscious selection of traits in artifacts is no stretch at all; it is rather a
detector, or a slug-detector, a quarter-balboa-detector, a doorstop, or a
deadly frequent event, one might suppose.

weapon. In its new role there might be some brief period of confusion or
Presumably, Fodor and company will not want to disagree with this
indeterminacy. How long a track record must something accumulate before
it treatment of artifacts, which have, they claim, no smidgen of real
intention-is no longer a two-bitser but a quarter-balboa-detector (a "q-
balber," we ality, but they may begin to worry that I have maneuvered them
onto a might call it)? On its very debut as a q-balber, after ten years of
faithful buttered slide, for now let's consider the exactly parallel case of
what the service as a two-bitser, is the state it goes into when presented with
a quarter-frog's eye tells the frog's brain. In Lettvin, Maturana, McCulloch,
and Pitts'

balboa a veridical detection of a quarter-balboa, or might there be a sort of
classic article (1959)—another Institute of Radio Engineers masterpiece—

force-of-habit error of nostalgia, a mistaken acceptance of a quarter-balboa
as they showed that the frog's visual system is sensitive to small moving
dark a U.S. quarter?

spots on the retina, tiny shadows cast in almost all natural circumstances by
As described, the two-bitser is ludicrously too simple to count as having
flies flying by in the vicinity. This "fly-detector" mechanism is
appropriately the sort of memory we have of our past experiences, but we
might take the wired to the hair trigger in the frog's tongue, which handily
explains how first step in the direction of providing it with one. Suppose it
has a counter on frogs feed themselves in a cruel world and thereby help
propagate their kind.

it, which advances each time it goes into its acceptance state, and which
Now, what does the frog's eye tell the frog's brain? That there is a fly out
stands, after its ten years of service, at 1,435,792. Suppose the counter is
not there, or that there is a fly-or-a-"slug" ( a fake fly of one sort or another
) or a reset to zero when it is moved to Panama, so that after its debut
acceptance of thing of kind F (whatever kind of thing reliably triggers this
visual gadget)?

a quarter-balboa, it reads 1,435,793. Does this tip the balance in favor of the
Millikan, Israel, and I, as Darwinian meaning theorists, have all discussed

claim that it has not yet switched to the task of identifying quarter-this very
case, and Fodor pounces on it to show what is wrong, by 408 THE
EVOLUTION OF MEANINGS

The Quest for Real Meaning 409

his lights, with any evolutionary account of such meanings: they are too
another? This is the notorious Twin Earth thought experiment of Hilary
indeterminate. They fail to distinguish, as they ought, between such frog-
eye Putnam (1975). I am reluctant to go into the details, but I have learned
that reports as "fly here now" and "fly or small dark projectile here now"
and so nothing short of spelling it all out and blocking all the exits will have
a prayer forth. But this is false. We can use the frog's environment of
selection (to the of persuading those whose allegiances lie with original
intentionality. So with extent that we can determine what it has been ) to
distinguish between the apologies, here goes. Armed with our background
briefing on the two-bitser various candidates. To do this, we use exactly the
same considerations we and the frog, we can see exactly what the Twin
Earth thought experiment used to settle the questions—to the extent that
they were worth trying to depends on for its undeniable rhetorical force.
Twin Earth, let's suppose, is a settle—about the meaning of the state in the
two-bitser. And to the extent that planet almost exactly like Earth, except
that there are no horses on Twin there is just no telling what that
environment of selection has been, there is Earth. There are animals that
look just like horses, and are called "horses" by also just no fact of the
matter about what the frog-eye report really means.

the inhabitants of Twin Boston and Twin London, "chev-aux" by the This
can be brought home vividly by sending the frog to Panama— or, more
inhabitants of Twin Paris, and so forth—that's how similar Twin Earth is to
precisely, sending the frog to a novel selective environment.

Earth. But these Twin Earth animals are not horses; they are something else.

Suppose scientists gather up a small population of frogs of some fly-Call
them schmorses, and if you like, you may suppose they are a sort of
grabbing species, on the brink of extinction, and put them under protective
pseudo-mammal, a hairy reptile or whatever—this is philosophy, and you

get custody in a new environment—a special frog zoo in which there are no
flies to make up whatever details you find you need to make your thought at
all but, rather, zookeepers who periodically arrange to launch little food
experiment "work." Now comes the dramatic part. One night, while you
pellets past the frogs in their care. To their delight, it works; the frogs thrive
sleep, you are whisked off to Twin Earth. (It is important that you sleep by
zapping their tongues for these pellets, and after a while there is a crowd
through this momentous change, for that keeps you in the dark about what
of descendant frogs who have never in their lives seen a fly, only pellets.

has happened to you—it keeps you "in the same state" you were in on
Earth.) What do their eyes tell their brains? If you insist on saying the
meaning When you awake, you look out the window and a schmorse
gallops by. "Lo, hasn't changed, you are in a bind, for this is simply an
artificially clear a horse!" you say (out loud or just to yourself, it makes no
difference). To instance of what happens in natural selection all the time:
exaptation. As make the case simple, let's suppose Twining, a handy Twin
Earth-ling, utters Darwin was careful to remind us, the reuse of machinery
for new purposes is the very same sounds at the very same time when he,
too, sees the schmorse one of the secrets of Mother Nature's success. We
can drive home the point, gallop by. Here is what Putnam and others insist
on: Twining says, and to any who wish some further persuasion, by
supposing that the captive frogs thinks, something true—namely, that a
schmorse has just run by. You, do not all do equally well, because, due to
variation in pellet detecting Earthling that you still are, say and think
something/alse—namely, that a prowess in their eyes, some eat less heartily
than others, and leave less horse has just run by. How long, though, would
you have to live on Twin progeny as a result. In short order there will have
been undeniable selection Earth, calling schmorses "horses" (just like all the
natives), before the state of for pellet detection—though it would be a
mistake to ask exactly when your mind (or what your eye tells your brain )
is a truth about schmorses enough of this has occurred for it to "count."

rather than a falsehood about horses? (When does the aboutness or inten-
Unless there were "meaningless" or "indeterminate" variation in the trig-
tionality leap to the new position?—a saltation demanded by these
theorists.) gering conditions of the various frogs' eyes, there could be no

raw material Would you ever make the transition? Would you somehow
make it without (blind variation) for selection for a new purpose to act
upon. The indeter-knowing it? The two-bitser was forever oblivious of the
change of meaning minacy that Fodor (and others) see as a flaw in
Darwinian accounts of the of its internal state, after all.

evolution of meaning is actually a precondition for any such evolution. The
I suppose you may be inclined to think that you are quite radically unlike
idea that there must be something determinate that the frog's eye really the
frog and the two-bitser. You, it may seem, have intrinsic or original means
—some possibly unknowable proposition in froggish that expresses
intentionality, and this marvelous property has a certain amount of inertia:
exactly what the frog's eye is telling the frog's brain—is just essentialism
your brain can't just turn on a dime and suddenly mean something entirely
applied to meaning (or function). Meaning, like function, on which it so
new by its old state. In contrast, frogs don't have much of a memory, and
directly depends, is not something determinate at its birth. It arises not by
two-bitsers none at all. What you mean by the word "horse" (your private
saltation or special creation, but by a (typically gradual) shift of circum-
mental concept of a horse) is something like one of those equinish beasts
that stances.

we Earthlings like to ride, an epithet anchored in your mind by all your
Now we are ready for the only case that really matters to these philoso-
memories of horse shows and cowboy movies. Let us agree that this
memory phers: what happens when we move a person from one
environment to matrix fixes the kind of thing to which your concept of
horse applies. Ex 410 THE EVOLUTION OF MEANINGS

The Quest for Real Meaning 411

hypothesi, schmorses are not beasts of that kind; they are not of the same
error, something we might never be able to discover, but a fact nonetheless?

species at all, but just conveniently indistinguishable by you from horses.
So, The same thing could happen to you, after all: imagine that a biologist
told according to this line of thought, you make unwitting errors every time

you vou one day, that coyotes are in fact dogs—members of the same
species.

(mis)classify a schmorse perceptually or in reflection ("Wasn't that a fine
You might find yourself wondering whether the biologist and you had the
horse I saw gallop by my window yesterday!").

same concept of dog. How strong was your allegiance to the view that
"dog"

But there is another way of thinking of the same example. Nothing forces
was a species term and not the name for a large subspecies of domestic
dogs?

us to suppose that your concept of a horse wasn't more relaxed in the first
Does your heart of hearts tell you loud and clear that you had already ruled
place, rather like your concept of a table. (Try telling the story of Twin
Earth out "by definition" the hypothesis that coyotes are dogs, or does it
silently with the suggestion that the tables there aren't really tables, but just
look like allow that your concept has all along had the openness to admit
this tables and are used for tables. It doesn't work, does it?) Horses and
schmorses purported discovery? Or would you find that now that the issue
has been may not be the same biological species, but what if you, like most
Earthlings, raised, you would have to settle, one way or the other,
something that had have no clear concept of species, and classify by
appearance: living thing that simply not been fixed before because it had
never come up before?

looks like Man-o-War. Horses and schmorses both fall into that kind, so,
Such a threat of indeterminacy undermines the argument in Putnam's when
you call a Twin Earth beast a horse, you're right after all. Given what
thought experiment. To preserve its point, Putnam tries to plug this gap by
you mean by "horse," schmorses are horses—a non-Earthly kind of horse,
declaring that our concepts—whether we know it or not—refer to natural
but a horse just the same. Non-Earthly tables are tables, too. It is clear that
kinds. But which kinds are natural? Varieties are just as natural as species,
you could have such a relaxed concept of horses, and that you could have a
which are as natural as genera and higher classifications. Essentialism with

tighter concept, according to which schmorses are not horses, not being of
the regard to the meaning of the frog's mental state and the two-bitser's
inner same Earthly species. Both cases are possible. Now, must it be
determinate state Q (or QB) was seen to evaporate; it must evaporate just as
surely for us.

whether your horse concept (prior to your move ) meant the species or the
The frog would have zapped just as readily at pellets in the wild, had any
wider class? It might be, if you are well read in biology, for instance, but
come its way, so it certainly was not equipped with anything that discrim-
suppose you are not. Then your concept— what "horse" actually means to
inated against pellets. In one sense, fly-or-pellet is a natural kind for frogs;
you—would suffer the same indeterminacy as the frog's concept of fly (or
they naturally fail to discriminate between the two. In another sense, fly-
orwas it all along the concept small airborne food item? ).

pellet is not a natural kind for frogs; their natural environment has never It
might help to have a more realistic example, something that could made
that classification relevant before. Exactly the same is true for you.

happen right here on Earth. I have been told that it once was the case that
the Had schmorses been secretly brought to Earth, you would have just as
Siamese had a word for, well, "cat" but had never seen or imagined any
other readily called them "horses." You would have been wrong if it was
somehow cats than Siamese cats. Let's suppose their word was "kat"—it
doesn't matter already fixed that what your term meant was the species, not
the lookalikes, what the actual details were, or even whether this particular
tale is true. It but if not, there would be no grounds at all for calling your
classification an could be. When they discovered that other varieties
existed, they had a error, since the distinction had never before come up.
Like the frog and the problem: did their word mean "cat" or "Siamese cat"?
Had they just two-bitser, you have internal states that get their meanings
from their discovered that there were other, rather different-looking, sorts of
kats, or functional roles, and where function fails to yield an answer, there
is nothing that kats and those other creatures belonged to a supergroup?
Was their more to inquire about.

traditional term the name of a species or a variety? If they lacked the The
tale of Twin Earth, if we read it through Darwinian spectacles, proves
biological theory that made this distinction, how could there possibly be a
that human meanings are just as derived as the meanings of two-bitsers and
fact of the matter? (Well, they might discover that peculiarities of
appearance frogs. This is not what it was intended to show, but any attempt
to block this were really very important to them—"That just doesn't look
like a kat, so it interpretation is forced to postulate mysterious and
unmotivated doctrines of isn't one!" And you might discover that you
similarly resisted the suggestion essentialism, and to insist, point-blank, that
there are facts about meaning that Shetland ponies were horses.)

that are utterly inert and undiscoverable, but facts all the same. Since some
When a Siamese person saw a ( non-Siamese ) cat walking by and thought
philosophers are ready to swallow these bitter pills, I need to provide a few

"Lo, a kat!" would this be an error or the simple truth? Perhaps the Siamese
farther persuasions.

person wouldn't have any opinion about how to answer this question, but
The idea that our meanings are just as dependent on function as the could
there nevertheless be a determinate fact about whether this was an meanings
of the states of artifacts, and hence just as derivative and potentially
indeterminate, strikes some philosophers as intolerable because it fails 412
THE EVOLUTION OF MEANINGS

Two Black Boxes 413

to give meaning a proper causal role. This is an idea we have seen in an
earlier incarnation, as the worry about minds' being mere effects, not
originating causes. If meaning gets determined by the selective forces that
endorse certain functional roles, then all meaning may seem, in a sense, to
be only retrospectively attributed: what something means is not an intrinsic
property it has, capable of making a difference in the world at the moment
of its birth, but at best a retrospective coronation secured only by an
analysis of the subsequent effects engendered. That is not quite right: an
engineering analysis of the two-bitser, newly arrived in Panama, would
permit us to say what roles the device, so configured, would be good for,

even if it had not yet been chosen for any role. We could reach this verdict:
its acceptance state FIGURE 14.1

could mean "quarter-balboa here now" if we put it in the right environment.

But of course it could also mean lots of other things, if placed in other
pushed the a button on box A, the red light flashed briefly on box B, and
environments, so it won't mean any one of them until a particular functional
whenever you pushed the (ß button on box A, the green light flashed
briefly.

role for it gets established—and there is no threshold for how long it takes a
The amber light never seemed to flash. They performed a few billion trials,
functional role to become established.

under a very wide variety of conditions, and found no exceptions. There
That is not enough for some philosophers, who think that meaning, so
seemed to them to be a causal regularity, which they conveniently summa-
construed, doesn't pull its weight. The clearest expression of this idea is
Fred rized thus:

Dretske's (1986) insistence that meaning must itself play a causal role in our
mental lives in a way that meaning never plays a causal role in the career of
All a's cause reds.

an artifact. Put this way, the attempt to distinguish real meaning from All ß's
cause greens.

artificial meaning betrays a yearning for skyhooks, a yearning for
something

"principled" that could block the gradual emergence of meaning from some
The causation passed through the copper wire somehow, they determined,
cascade of mere purposeless, mechanical causes, but this is (you must since
severing it turned off all effects in box B, and shielding the two boxes
suspect) an optional and tendentious way of putting it. As usual, the issues
from each other without severing the wire never disrupted the regularity. So
are more complex than I am showing,4 but we can force the key points into

naturally they were curious to know just how the causal regularity they had
the open with the help of a little fable I recently devised precisely to give
discovered was effected through the wire. Perhaps, they thought, pressing
these philosophers fits. It works. First the fable, and then the fits.

button a caused a low-voltage pulse to be emitted down the wire, triggering
the red light, and pressing button (3 caused a high-voltage pulse, which
triggered the green. Or perhaps pressing a caused a single pulse, which
triggered the red light, and pressing ß caused a double pulse. Clearly, there
2. Two B

LACK BOXES

was something that always happened in the wire when you pressed button
a, and something different that always happened in the wire when you
pressed Once upon a time, there were two large black boxes, A and B,
connected by ß. Discovering just what this was would explain the causal
regularity they a long insulated copper wire. On box A there were two
buttons, marked a had discovered.

and ß, and on box B there were three lights, red, green, and amber.
Scientists A wiretap of sorts on the wire soon revealed that things were
more studying the behavior of the boxes had observed that whenever you
complicated. Whenever either button was pushed on box A, a long stream
of pulses and gaps (ons and offs, or bits) was sent swiftly down the wire to
box B—ten thousand bits, to be exact. But it was a different pattern each
time!

Clearly, there had to be a feature or property of the strings of bits that 4.
Dretske and His Critics (McLaughlin, ed, 1991) is devoted largely to this
issue.

triggered the red light in one case and the green light in the other. What 5.
This began as an impromptu response to Jaegwon Kim's talk at Harvard,
November 29, could it be? They decided to open up box B and see what
happened to the 1990: "Emergence, Non-Reductive Materialism, and

'Downward Causation,' " and evolved under the persistent rebuttals of Kim
and many other philosophers, to whom I am grateful.

414 THE EVOLUTION OF MEANINGS

Two Black Boxes 415

strings of bits when they arrived. Inside B they found a supercomputer—
just suggest to the scientists that there were really three varieties of strings:
red an ordinary digital, serial supercomputer, with a large memory,
containing a strings, green strings, and amber strings—and amber strings
outnumbered huge program and a huge data base, written, of course, in
more bit strings.

red and green strings by many, many orders of magnitude. Almost all
strings And when they traced the effects of the incoming bit strings on this
computer were amber strings. That made the regularity they had discovered
all the program, they found nothing out of the ordinary: the input string
would more exciting and puzzling.

always make its way into the central processing unit in normal fashion,
What was it about red strings that turned on the red light, and green strings
where it would provoke a few billion operations to be performed in a few
that turned on the green light? Of course, in each particular case, there was
seconds, ending, always, with either of two output signals, a 1 (which
turned no mystery at all. They could trace the causation of each particular
string on the red light) or a 0 (which turned on the green light). In every
case, they through the supercomputer in B and see that, with gratifying
determinism, it found, they could explain each step of the causation at the
mi croscopic level produced its red or green or amber light, as the case
might be. What they without any difficulty or controversy. No occult causes
were suspected to be couldn't find, however, was a way of predicting which
of the three effects a operating, and, for instance, when they arranged to
input the same sequence new string would have, just by examining it
(without "hand-simulating" its of ten thousand bits again and again, the
program in box B always yielded effect on box B ). They knew from their
empirical data that the odds were the same output, red or green.

very high that any new string considered would be amber— unless it was a
But this was mildly puzzling, because although it always gave the same
string known to have been emitted by box A, in which case the odds were
output, it didn't always yield the same output by going through the same
better than a billion to one that it would be either red or green, but no one
intermediate steps. In fact, it almost always passed through different states
could tell which without running it through box B to see how the program
before yielding the same output. This in itself was no mystery, since the
settled out.

program kept a copy of each input it received, and so, when the same input
Since, in spite of much brilliant and expensive research, they found them-
arrived a second or third or thousandth time, the state of the memory of the
selves still utterly unable to predict whether a string would turn out to be
red, computer was slightly different each time. But the output was always
the green, or amber, some theorists were tempted to call these properties
same; if the light turned red the first time a particular string was input, it
emergent properties. What they meant was that the properties were (they
always turned red for the same string thereafter, and the same regularity
held thought) unpredictable in principle from a mere analysis of the micro-
for green strings ( as the scientists began to call them ). All strings, they
were properties of the strings themselves. But this didn't seem likely at all,
since tempted to hypothesize, are either red strings ( cause the red light to
flash) or each particular case was as predictable as any deterministic input
to a green strings (cause the green light to flash). But of course they hadn't
tested deterministic program could be. In any event, whether or not the
properties all possible strings—only strings that had been emitted by box A.

of red, green, and amber were unpredictable in principle or merely in So
they decided to test their hypothesis by disconnecting A from B tem-
practice, they certainly were surprising and mysterious properties.

porarily and inserting variations on A's output strings to B. To their puzzle-
Perhaps the solution to the mystery lay in box A. They opened it up and
ment and dismay, they discovered that almost always when they tampered
found another supercomputer—of a different make and model, and running
a with a string from A, the amber light flashed! It was almost as if box B

had different gigantic program, but also just a garden-variety digital
computer.

detected their intervention. There was no doubt, however, that box B would
They soon determined that whenever you pushed button a this sent the
readily accept man-made versions of red strings by flashing red, and man-
program off in one way, by sending a code (11111111) to the CPU, and
made versions of green strings by flashing green. It was only when a bit—
or whenever you pushed button (3 this sent a different code ( 00000000 ) to
the more than one bit—was changed in a red or green string that the amber
light CPU, setting in motion a different set of billions of operations. It
turned out usually—almost always—came on. "You've killed it!" somebody
once that there was an internal "clock" ticking away millions of times a
second, blurted out, after watching a "tampered" red string turn into an
amber string, and whenever you pushed either button the first thing the
computer did was and this led to a flurry of speculation that red and green
strings were in some take the "time" from the clock (e.g.,
101101010101010111) and break it up sense alive—perhaps male and
female—whereas amber strings were dead into strings it then used to
determine which subroutines to call in which strings. But, appealing as this
hypothesis was, it did not turn out to lead order, and which part of its
memory to access first in the course of its anywhere, although further
experimentation with a few billion random preparation of a bit string to
send down the wire.

variations on bit strings of ten thousand bits in length did strongly The
scientists were able to figure out that it was this clock-consulting (which
was as good as random) that virtually guaranteed that the same bit 416 THE
EVOLUTION OF MEANINGS

Two Black Boxes 417

string was never sent out twice. But in spite of this randomness, or pseudo-
to choose at random (or pseudo-random) one of its "beliefs" (either a stored
randomness, it remained true that whenever you pushed button a the bit
axiom or a generated implication of its axioms), translate it into English (in
a string the computer concocted turned out to be red, and whenever you
pushed computer, English characters would already be in ASCII), add

enough button (3 the bit string eventually sent turned out to be green.
Actually, the random bits after the period to bring the total up to ten
thousand, and send scientists did find a few anomalous cases: in roughly
one in a billion trials, the resulting string to B, which translated this input
into its own language pushing the a button caused a green string to be
emitted, or pushing the ß (which was Swedish Lisp), and tested it against its
own "beliefs"— its data button caused a red string to be emitted. This tiny
blemish in perfection only base. Since both data bases were composed of
truths, and roughly the same whetted the scientists' appetite for an
explanation of the regularity.

truths, thanks to their inference engines, whenever A sent B something A
And then, one day, along came the two AI hackers who had built the

"believed," B "believed" it, too, and signaled this by flashing a red light.

boxes, and they explained it all. (Do not read on if you want to figure out
the Whenever A sent B what A took to be a falsehood, B announced that it
mystery for yourself.) Al, who had built box A, had been working for years
judged that this was indeed a falsehood by flashing a green light.

on an "expert system"—a data base containing "true propositions" about
And whenever anyone tampered with the transmission, this almost always
everything under the sun, and an inference engine to deduce further resulted
in a string that was not a well-formed sentence of English (B had
implications from the axioms that composed the data base. There were
absolutely zero tolerance for "typographical" errors). B responded to these
major-league baseball statistics, meteorological records, biological taxono-
by flashing the amber light. Whenever anyone chose a bit string at random,
mies, histories of the world's nations, and hosts of trivia in the data base.
Bo, the odds were Vast that it would not be a well-formed truth or falsehood
of the Swede who had built box B, had been working during the same time
on a English ASCII; hence the preponderance of amber strings.

rival "world-knowledge" data base for his own expert system. They had
both So, said Al and Bo, the emergent property red was actually the
property of stuffed their respective data bases with as many "truths" as

years of work had being a true sentence of English, and green was the
property of being a permitted.6

falsehood in English. Suddenly, the search that had eluded the scientists for
But as the years progressed, they had grown bored with expert systems,
years became child's play. Anyone could compose red strings ad nauseam
—

and had both decided that the practical promise of this technology was
vastly just write down the ASCII code for "Houses are bigger than peanuts"
or overrated. The systems weren't actually very good at solving interesting

"Whales don't fly" or "Three times four is two less than two times seven,"
for problems, or "thinking," or "finding creative solutions to problems." All
they instance. If you wanted a green string, try "Nine is less than eight" or
"New were good at, thanks to their inference engines, was generating lots
and lots York is the capital of Spain."

of true sentences (in their respective languages), and testing input sentences
Philosophers soon hit upon cute tricks, such as finding strings that were (in
their respective languages) for truth and falsity—relative to their red the
first hundred times they were given to B but green thereafter (e.g.,

"knowledge," of course. So Al and Bo had got together and figured out how
the ASCII for "This sentence has been sent to you for evaluation fewer than
the fruits of their wasted effort could be put to use. They decided to make a
a hundred and one times" ).

philosophical toy. They chose a lingua franca for translating between their
But, said some philosophers, the string properties red and green are not two
representational systems (it was English, actually, sent in standard really
truth in English and falsity in English. After all, there are English ASCII
code, the code of electronic mail), and hooked the machines together truths
whose ASCII expression takes millions of bits, and besides, in spite of with
a wire. Whenever you pushed A's a button, this instructed A their best
efforts, Al and Bo didn't always insert facts in their programs.

Some of what had passed for common knowledge when they were working
on their data bases had since been disproven. And so forth. There were lots
of reasons why the string property—the causal property—of redness was
not 6. For a real-world example of such a project, see Douglas Lenat's
enormous CYC (short quite exactly the property of truth in English. So,
perhaps red could better be for "encyclopedia" ) project at MCC ( Lenat and
Guha 1990). The idea is to hand-code all defined as relatively short
expression in English ASCII of something the millions of facts in an
encyclopedia (plus all the other millions of facts that everyone

"believed" true by box B (whose "beliefs" are almost all true). This satisfied
knows, so there is no point in putting them in the encyclopedia—such as the
facts that mountains are bigger than molehills, and toasters can't fly ), and
then attach an inference some, but other picked nits, insisting, for various
reasons, that this definition engine that can update, preserve consistency,
deduce surprising implications, and in was inexact, or had counterexamples
that could not be ruled out in any non-general service the world-knowledge
base. For an entirely different approach to AI, ad hoc way, and so forth. But
as Al and Bo pointed out, there were no better consider Rodney Brooks' and
Lynn Stein's humanoid-robot project (Dennett 1994c).

candidate descriptions of the property to be found, and 418 THE
EVOLUTION OF MEANINGS

Blocking the Exits 4 19

hadn't the scientists been yearning for just such an explanation? Hadn't the
ties anywhere in the world. Content, they said, had been eliminated. The
mystery of red and green strings now been entirely dissolved? Moreover,
debate went on for years, but the mystery with which we began was solved.

now that it was dissolved, couldn't one see that there wasn't any hope at all
of explaining the causal regularity with which we began our tale without
using some semantical (or mentalistic) terms?

Some philosophers argued that, though the newfound description of the 3.
BLOCKING THE EXITS

regularity in the activity in the wire could be used to predict box B's
behavior, it was not a causal regularity after all. Truth and falsehood ( or
any The tale ends there. Experience teaches, however, that there is no such
thing of the adjusted stand-ins just considered) are semantic properties, and
as such as a thought experiment so clearly presented that no philosopher
can are entirely abstract, and hence could not cause anything. Nonsense,
others misinterpret it, so, in order to forestall some of the most attractive
misinterpretations, I will inelegantly draw attention to a few of the critical
details retorted. Pushing button a causes the red light to go on just as
certainly as and explain their roles in this intuition pump.

turning the ignition key causes your car to start. If it had turned out that
what was being sent down the wire was simply high versus low voltage, or
one (l)The devices in boxes A and B are nothing but automated encyclo-
pulse versus two, everybody would agree that this was a paradigm causal
pedias—not even "walking encyclopedias," just "boxes of truths."

system. The fact that this system turned out to be a Rube Goldberg machine
Nothing in the story presupposes or implies that these devices are didn't
show that the reliability of the link between a and red flashes was any
conscious, or thinking things, or even agents, except in the same less causal.
On the contrary, in every single case the scientists could trace out minimal
sense in which a thermostat is an agent. They are utterly the exact
microcausal path that explained the result.7

boring intentional systems, rigidly fixed to fulfilling a single, simple
Convinced by this line of reasoning, other philosophers began to argue that
goal. They contain large numbers of true propositions and the infer-this
showed that the properties red, green, and amber weren't really ential
machinery necessary to generate more truths, and to test for semantical or
mentalistic properties after all, but only imitation semantical

"truth" by testing a candidate proposition against their existing data
properties, mere as if semantical properties. What red and green were,
really, bases.8

were very, very complicated syntactical properties. These philosophers
Since the two systems were created independently, they cannot declined,

however, to say anything further about just what syntactical plausibly be
supposed to contain exactly the same truths (actually or properties these
were, or to explain how even young children could swiftly even virtually ),
but, for the prank to work as well as I claim it did in and reliably produce
instances of them, or recognize them. The philosophers the story, we must
suppose a very large overlap, so that it was highly were nevertheless
convinced that there had to be a purely syntactic unlikely that a truth
generated by A would not be recognized as such description of the
regularity, since, after all, the causal systems in question by B. Two
considerations, I claim, make this plausible: (a) Al and Bo were "just"
computers, and computers are "just" syntactic engines, not may live in
different countries and have different native languages, capable of any real
semanticity.

but they inhabit the same world, and (b) although there are kazil-lions

"I suppose," retorted Al and Bo, "that, if you had found us inside our black
of true propositions about that world (our world), the fact that both Al
boxes, playing a trick on you by following the same scheme, you would
then and Bo set out to create useful data bases—containing the information
relent and agree that the operative causal property was genuine truth (or that
is relevant to all but the most recherche of human purposes—

believed truth, in any event). Can you propose any good reason for drawing
would guarantee a high degree of overlap between the two such a
distinction?" This led some to declare that in a certain important sense
independently created systems. Although Al might know that at noon Al
and Bo had been in the boxes, since they were responsible for creating the
on his twentieth birthday his left foot was closer to the North respective
data bases, as models of their own beliefs. It led others to deny that there
really were any semantical or mentalistic proper-8. Since these are just
boxes of truths, no support is hereby given to the "language of thought"
hypothesis (Fodor 1975). I supposed that the world knowledge was stored
in a quasi-linguistic form just to make the storytelling easier (which is
probably also the 7. Some have argued that my account of patterns in
Dennett 1991b is epiphenomenalistn reason motivating most researchers in

cognitive science, who adopt the language-of-about content. This is my
reply.

thought hypothesis out of convenience!).

420 THE EVOLUTION OF MEANINGS

Blocking the Exits 421

Pole than to the South Pole, and Bo had not forgotten that his first will be
just as visible to them as to us, but they will be clueless about ASCII.

French teacher was named Dupont, these would not be truths that To them,
this gift from outer space will exhibit an utterly mysterious reg-either would
be apt to put in his data base. But if you doubt that the ularity, totally
beyond all analytic probes, unless they hit upon the idea that mere fact that
they were both intent on creating an internationally each box contains a
description of a world, and that the descriptions are of useful encyclopedia
would ensure such a close correspondence be the same world. It is the fact
that each box bears multifarious semantic tween their respective data bases,
just add, as an inelegant detail, the relationships to the same things, though
expressed in different "terminology"

convenient fact that they compared notes as to topics to be covered and
differently axiomatized, that grounds the regularity.

during their years of hacking.

When I tried this thought experiment out on Danny Hillis, creator of the
(2)Why not just have Al and Bob (a fellow American), or, for that matter,
Connection Machine, he thought immediately of a cryptographic "solution"

why not simply have a duplicate of Al's system in box B? Because it to the
puzzle, and then granted that my solution could be profitably viewed must
be the essence (oops!) of my story that no simple, feasibly as a special case
of his solution: "Al and Bo were using the world as a 'one-discoverable
syntactic matching up could explain the regu-larity. That time pad!'"—an
apt allusion to a standard technique of encryption. You can is why Bo's

system is in Swedish Lisp—to conceal from prying eyes see the point by
imagining a variation. You and your best friend are about to the underlying
semantic commonalities between the data structures be captured by hostile
forces, who may know English but not much about consulted during A's
sentence-generation task and B's sentence-your world. You both know
Morse code, and hit upon the following translation-and-truth-testing task.
The idea was to create two systems impromptu encryption scheme: for a
dash, speak a truth; for a dot, speak a that exhibited the fascinating
regularity of external be-havior falsehood. Your captors are permitted to
listen to you two speak: "Birds lay described but that were internally as
different as possible, so that only eggs, and toads fly. Chicago is a city, and
my feet are not made of tin, and the fact that their respective innards were
systematic representations baseball is played in August," you say,
answering "No" ( dash-dot; dash-dash-of a common world could explain
the regularity.

dash) to whatever your friend has just asked. Even if your captors know (3)
We might pause to ask whether or not two such systems could ever be
Morse code, unless they can determine the truth and falsity of these senso
inscrutable as to be invulnerable to reverse engineering. Cryp-tences, they
cannot detect the properties that stand for dot and dash. This tography has
moved into such rarefied and arcane regions that one variation could be
added to our fable, for spice, as follows. Instead of ship-should think thrice
at least before declaring either way. I have no idea ping the computer
systems in the boxes to Mars, we put Al and Bo in the whether anybody can
make a sound argument to the effect that there boxes and ship them to
Mars. The Martians will be as puzzled by them, if are unbreakable
encryption schemes or that there aren't. But, en-they play the Morse-code
prank, as by the computers, unless they draw the cryption aside, hackers
will appreciate that all the convenient com-conclusion (obvious to us, but
we're not Martians) that these things in the ments and other signposts one
places in the "source code" when boxes are to be semantically interpreted.

composing a program vanish when the source code is "compiled,"

The point of the fable is simple. There is no substitute for the intentional
leaving behind an almost impossible-to-decipher tangle of machine stance;

either you adopt it, and explain the pattern by finding the semantic-
instructions. "Decompiling" is sometimes possible in practice (is it level
facts, or you will forever be baffled by the regularity—the causal always
possible in principle?), though of course it won't restore the regularity—that
is manifestly there. The same moral, we have seen, can be comments but
just render salient the structures in the higher-level drawn about interpreting
the historical facts of evolutionary history. Even if language. My
assumption that the scientists' efforts at decompiling the you can describe,
in matchless microdetail, every causal fact in the history of program and
deciphering the data bases came to naught could be every giraffe who has
ever lived, unless you go up a level or two and ask strengthened by
postulating encryption, if need be.

"Why?"—hunting for the reasons endorsed by Mother Nature—you will
never be able to explain the manifest regularities, such as the fact that In the
story as told, we can agree that it is bizarre that the scientists never giraffes
have come to have long necks, for instance. That is Dewey's point in
thought of checking to see if there was an ASCII translation of the bit the
quotation given earlier in this chapter.

streams running through the wire. How could they be so dense? Fair
enough: At this juncture, if you are like many philosophers, you are
attracted by the send the whole gadget ( boxes A and B, and the connecting
wire ) to "Mars,"

claim that this thought experiment "works" only because boxes A and B are
and let the alien scientists there try to figure out the regularity. The fact that
artifacts whose intentionality, such as it is, is entirely derived and
artifactual.

all a's cause reds, all ß's cause greens, and random bit strings cause ambers
The data structures in their memories get their reference (if they 422 THE
EVOLUTION OF MEANINGS

Safe Passage to the Future 423

get any at all) from indirect reliance on the sense organs, life histories, and
prospect around for the ideal location, as best you can foresee, for a fixed

purposes of their creators, Al and Bo. The real source of the meaning or
truth installation that will be well supplied with water, sunlight, and
whatever else or semanticity in the artifacts lies in these human artificers.
(That was the your capsule (and the supersystem itself) will need for the
duration. The point of the suggestion that in a certain sense Al and Bo were
in their main drawback to such an installation or "plant" is that it cannot be
moved if respective boxes.) Now, I might have told the story differently:
inside the harm comes its way—if, say, someone decides to build a freeway
right boxes were two robots, Al and Bo, which had each spent a longish
"lifetime"

where it is located. The alternative strategy is much more sophisticated and
scurrying around in the world gathering facts before getting in their respec-
expensive, but avoids this drawback: design a mobile facility to house your
tive boxes. I chose a simpler route, to forestall all the questions about
capsule, along with the requisite sensors and early-warning devices so that
it whether box A or box B was "really thinking," but we may now reinstate
the can move out of harm's way and seek out new sources of energy and
repair issues thereby finessed, since it is finally time to dispose once and for
all of materials as it needs them. In short, build a giant robot and install the
capsule the hunch that original intentionality could not emerge in any
artifactual (with you inside it) in it.

"mind" without the intervention of a (human?) artificer. Suppose that is so.

These two basic strategies are copied from nature: they correspond
Suppose, in other words, that, whatever differences there might be between
a roughly to the division between plants and animals. Since the latter, more
simple box of truths like box A and the fanciest imaginable robot, since
both sophisticated, strategy better fits our purposes, let's suppose that you
decide would just be artifacts, neither could have real—or original—
intentionality, to build a robot to house your capsule. You should try to
design this robot so but only the derivative intentionality borrowed from its
creator. Now you are that above all else it "chooses" actions designed to
further your interests, of ready for another thought experiment, a reductio
ad absur-dum of that course. Don't call these mere switching points in your
robot's control system supposition.

"choice" points if you think that this would imply that the robot had free
will or consciousness, for I don't mean to smuggle any such contraband into
the thought experiment. My point is uncontroversial: the power of any
computer 4. S

AFE PASSAGE TO THE FUTURE

program lies in its capacity to execute branching instructions, zigging one
way or another depending on some test it executes on the data then
available Suppose you decided, for whatever reasons, that you wanted to
experience to it, and my point is just that, as you plan your robot's control
system, you life in the twenty-fifth century, and suppose that the only
known way of would be wise to try to structure it so that whenever
branching opportunities keeping your body alive that long required it to be
placed in a hibernation confront it, it will tend to branch down that path that
has the highest device of sorts. Let's suppose it's a "cryogenic chamber" that
cools your body probability of serving your interests. You are, after all, the
raison d'etre of down to a few degrees above absolute zero. In this chamber
your body would the whole gadget. The idea of designing hardware and
software that are be able to rest, suspended in a super-coma, for as long as
you liked. You specifically attuned to the interests of a particular human
individual is not could arrange to climb into the chamber, and its
surrounding support capsule, even science fiction any more, though the
particular design problems facing be put to sleep, and then automatically be
awakened and released in 2401.

your robot-builders would be profoundly difficult engineering challenges,
This is a time-honored science-fiction theme, of course.

somewhat beyond the state of the art today. This mobile entity would need a
Designing the capsule itself is not your only engineering problem, since

"vision" system to guide its locomotion, and other "sensory" systems as
well, the capsule must be protected and supplied with the requisite energy
(for in addition to the self-monitoring capacities to inform it of its needs.

refrigeration, etc.) for over four hundred years. You will not be able to
count Since you will be comatose throughout, and thus cannot stay awake
to guide and plan its strategies, you will have to design the robot
supersystem on your children and grandchildren for this stewardship, of
course, since they to generate its own plans in response to changing
circumstances over the will be long dead before the year 2401, and you
would be most unwise to centuries. It must "know" how to "seek out" and
"recognize" and then exploit presume that your more distant descendants, if
any, will take a lively interest energy sources, how to move to safer
territory, how to "anticipate" and then in your well-being. So you must
design a supersystem to protect your capsule avoid dangers. With so much
to be done, and done fast, you had best rely and to provide the energy it
needs for four hundred years.

whenever you can on economies: give your robot no more discriminatory
Here there are two basic strategies you might follow. On one, you should
prowess than it will probably need in order to distinguish whatever needs
distinguishing in the world—given its particular constitution.

9. An earlier version of this thought experiment appeared in Dennett 1987b,
ch. 8.

424 THE EVOLUTION OF MEANINGS

Safe Passage to the Future 425

Your task would be made much more difficult if you couldn't count on best
interests. From your selfish point of view, that is what you hope, but this
your robot's being the only such robot around with such a mission. Let us
robot's projects are out of your direct control until you are awakened. It will
suppose that, in addition to whatever people and other animals are up and
have some internal representation of its currently highest goals, its summum
about during the centuries to come, there will be other robots, many dif-
ferent bonum, but if it has fallen among persuasive companions of the sort
we have robots (and perhaps "plants" as well), competing with your robot
for energy imagined, the iron grip of the engineering that initially designed
it will be and safety. (Why might such a fad catch on? Let's suppose we get
irrefutable jeopardized. It will still be an artifact, still acting only as its

engineering advance evidence that travelers from another galaxy will arrive
on our planet permits it to act, but following a set of desiderata partly of its
own devising.

in 2401. I for one would ache to be around to meet them, and if cold storage
Still, according to the assumption we decided to explore, this robot will was
my only prospect, I'd be tempted to go for it.) If you have to plan for not
exhibit anything but derived intentionality, since it is just an artifact, dealing
with other robotic agents, acting on behalf of other clients like created to
serve your interests. We might call this position "client centrism"

yourself, you would be wise to design your robot with enough
sophistication with regard to the robot: / am the original source of all the
derived meaning in its control system to permit it to calculate the likely
benefits and risks of within my robot, however far afield it drifts. It is just a
survival machine cooperating with other robots, or of forming alliances for
mutual benefit. You designed to carry me safely into the future. The fact
that it is now engaged would be most unwise to suppose that other clients
will be enamored of the strenuously in projects that are only remotely
connected with my interests, rule of "live and let live"—there may well be
inexpensive "parasite" robots and even antithetical to them, does not,
according to our assumption, endow out there, for instance, just waiting to
pounce on your expensive contraption any of its control states, or its
"sensory" or "perceptual" states, with genuine and exploit it. Any
calculations your robot makes about these threats and intentionality. If you
still want to insist on this client centrism, then you opportunities would
have to be "quick and dirty"; there is no foolproof way should be ready to
draw the further conclusion that you yourself never enjoy of telling friends
from foes, or traitors from promise-keepers, so you will any states with
original intentionality, since you are just a survival machine have to design
your robot to be, like a chess-player, a decision-maker who designed,
originally, for the purpose of preserving your genes until they can takes
risks in order to respond to time pressure.

replicate. Our intentionality is derived, after all, from the intentionality of
The result of this design project would be a robot capable of exhibiting our
selfish genes. They are the Unmeant Meaners, not us!

self-control of a high order. Since you must cede fine-grained real-time If
this position does not appeal to you, consider jumping the other way.

control to it once you put yourself to sleep, you will be as "remote" as the
Acknowledge that a fancy-enough artifact—something along the lines of
engineers in Houston were when they gave the Viking spacecraft its auton-
these imagined robots— can exhibit real intentionality, given its rich func-
omy (see chapter 12). As an autonomous agent, it will be capable of
deriving tional embedding in the environment and its prowess at self-
protection and its own subsidiary goals from its assessment of its current
state and the self-control.10 It, like you, owes its very existence to a project
the goal of import of that state for its ultimate goal (which is to preserve
you till 2401).

These secondary goals, which will respond to circumstances you cannot
predict in detail (if you could, you could hard-wire the best responses to
them), may take the robot far afield on century-long projects, some of
which 10. In the light of this thought experiment, consider an issue raised
by Fred Dretske may well be ill-advised, in spite of your best efforts. Your
robot may embark (personal communication) with admirable crispness: "I
think we could (logically ) create an artifact that acquired original
intentionality, but not one that (at the moment of on actions antithetical to
your purposes, even suicidal, having been creation, as it were) had it." How
much commerce with the world would be enough to convinced by another
robot, perhaps, to subordinate its own life mission to turn the dross of
derived intentionality into the gold of original intentionality? This is our
some other.

old problem of essentialism, in a new guise. It echoes the desire to zoom in
on a crucial This robot we have imagined will be richly engaged in its
world and its moment and thereby somehow identify a threshold that marks
the first member of a projects, always driven ultimately by whatever
remains of the goal states that species, or the birth of real function, or the
origin of life, and as such it manifests a failure to accept the fundamental
Darwinian idea that all such excellences emerge gradually by you set up for
it at the time you entered the capsule. All the preferences it finite
increments. Notice, too, that Dretske's doctrine is a peculiar brand of

extreme will ever have will be the offspring of the preferences you initially
endowed Spencerism: the current environment must do the shaping of the
organism before the it with, in hopes that they would carry you into the
twenty-fifth century, but shape "counts" as having real intentionality; past
environments, filtered through the that is no guarantee that actions taken in
the light of the robot's descendant wisdom of engineers or a history of
natural selection, don't count—even if they result in preferences will
continue to be responsive, directly, to your tne very same functional
structures. There is something wrong and something right in this. More
important than any particular past history of individual appropriate
commerce 426 THE EVOLUTION OF MEANINGS

Safe Passage to the Future 427

which was to create a survival machine, but it, like you, has taken on a
certain minndless, algorithmic R and D instead of a gift from on high. Jerry
Fodor autonomy, has become a locus of self-control and self-determination,
not by may joke about the preposterous idea of our being Mother Nature's
artifacts, any miracle, but just by confronting problems during its own
"lifetime" and but the laughter rings hollow; the only alternative views posit
one skyhook or more or less solving them—problems of survival presented
to it by the world.

another. The shock of this conclusion may be enough to make you more
Simpler survival machines—plants, for instance—never achieve the heights
sympathetic to Chomsky's or Searle's forlorn attempts to conceal the mind
of self-redefinition made possible by the complexities of your robot;
consid-behind impenetrable mystery, or Gould's forlorn attempts to escape
from the ering them just as survival machines for their comatose inhabitants
leaves no implication that natural selection is all it takes—an algorithmic
series of patterns in their behavior unexplained.

cranes cranking out ever higher forms of design.

If you pursue this avenue, which of course I recommend, then you must Or
it may inspire you to look elsewhere for a savior. Didn't the mathe-abandon
Searle's and Fodor's "principled" objection to "strong AI." The matician
Kurt Godel prove a great theorem that demonstrated the impos-imagined

robot, however difficult or unlikely an engineering feat, is not an sibility of
AI? Many have thought so, and recently their hunch was given a
impossibility—nor do they claim it to be. They concede the possibility of
powerful boost by one of the world's most eminent physicists and mathe-
such a robot, but just dispute its "metaphysical status"; however adroitly it
maticians, Roger Penrose, in his book The Emperor's New Mind: Concern-
managed its affairs, they say, its intentionality would not be the real thing.

ing Computers, Minds, and the Laws of Physics ( 1989), to which the next
That's cutting it mighty fine. I recommend abandoning such a forlorn dis-
chapter is devoted.

claimer and acknowledging that the meaning such a robot would discover in
its world, and exploit in its own communications with others, would be
exactly as real as the meaning you enjoy. Then your selfish genes can be
CHAPTER 14: Real meaning, the sort of meaning our words and ideas
have, seen to be the original source of your intentionality—and hence of
every is itself an emergent product of originally meaningless processes—
the al-meaning you can ever contemplate or conjure up—even though you
can then gorithmic processes that have created the entire biosphere,
ourselves in-transcend your genes, using your experience, and in particular
the culture cluded. A robot designed as a survival machine for you would,
like you, owe you imbibe, to build an almost entirely independent ( or
"transcendent" ) its existence to a project ofR and D with other ulterior
ends, but this would locus of meaning on the base your genes have
provided.

not prevent it from being an autonomous creator of meanings, in the fullest
I find this an entirely congenial—indeed, inspiring—resolution of the sense.

tension between the fact that I, as a person, consider myself to be a source
of meaning, an arbiter of what matters and why, and the fact that at the
same CHAPTER 15: One more influential source of skepticism about AI
(and time I am a member of the species Homo sapiens, a product of several
billion Darwin's dangerous idea) must be considered and neutralized: the
persis-years of nonmiraculous R and D, enjoying no feature that didn't
spring from tently popular idea to the effect that Godel's Theorem proves
that AI is the same set of processes one way or another. I know that others

find this impossible. Roger Penrose has recently revived this meme, which
thrives in vision so shocking that they turn with renewed eagerness to the
conviction darkness, and his exposition of it is so clear mat it amounts to
exposure. We that somewhere, somehow, there just has to be a blockade
against Darwinism can exapt his artifact to our own purposes: with his
unintended help, this and AI. I have tried to show that Darwin's dangerous
idea carries the meme can be extinguished.

implication that there is no such blockade. It follows from the truth of
Darwinism that you and I are Mother Nature's artifacts, but our
intentionality is none the less real for being an effect of millions of years of
with the real world is the disposition to engage in supple future interactions,
appropriately responsive to whatever novelty the world imposes. But—and
this is the solid ground, I think, for Dretske's intuition—since this capacity
for swift redesign is apt to show itself in current or recent patterns of
interaction, his insistence that an artifact exhibit "do-it-yourself
understanding" ( Dennett 1992 ) is plausible, so long as we jettison the
essentialism and treat it simply as an important symptom of intentionality
worthy of the name.

The Sword in the Stone 429

doubts its soundness. The controversy all lies in how to harness the theorem
to prove anything about the nature of the mind. The weakness in any such
argument must come at the crucial empirical step: the step where we look to
CHAPTER FIFTEEN

see our heroes (ourselves, our mathematicians) doing the thing that the
robot The Emperor's New Mind,

simply cannot do. Is the feat in question like pulling the sword from the
stone, a feat that has no plausible lookalikes, or is it a feat that cannot
readily (if at all) be distinguished from mere approximations of the feat?
That is the and Other Fables

crucial question, and there has been a lot of confusion about just what the
distinguishing feat is. Some of the confusion can be blamed on Kurt Godel

himself, for he thought that he had proved that the human mind must be a
skyhook.

In 1931 Gödel, a young mathematician at the University of Vienna,
published his proof, one of the most important and surprising mathematical
results of the twentieth century, establishing an absolute limit on
mathematical proof that is really quite shocking. Recall the Euclidean
geometry you studied in high school, in which you learned to create formal
proofs of theorems of geometry, from a basic list of axioms and definitions,
using a 1. THE SWORD IN THE STONE

fixed list of inference rules. You were learning your way around in an
axiomatization of plane geometry. Remember how the teacher would draw
a In other words then, if a machine is expected to be infallible, it cannot
geometric diagram on the blackboard, showing a triangle, say, with various
also be intelligent. There are several theorems which say almost exactly
straight lines intersecting its sides in various ways, meeting at various
angles, that. But these theorems say nothing about how much intelligence
may and then ask you such questions as: "Do these two lines have to
intersect at a be displayed if a machine makes no pretence at infallibility.

right angle? Is this triangle over here congruent to that triangle over there?"

—A

Often the answer was obvious: you could just see that the lines had to UN
TURING 1946, p. 124

intersect at a right angle, that the triangles were congruent. But it was
another The attempts over the years to use Godel's Theorem to prove
something matter—in fact, a considerable amount of inspired drudgery—to
prove it important about the nature of the human mind have an elusive
atmosphere of from the axioms, formally, according to the strict rules. Did
you ever wonder, romance. There is something strangely thrilling about the
prospect of "using when the teacher put a new diagram on the blackboard,
whether there might science" to such an effect. I think I can put my finger
on it. The key text is be facts about plane geometry that you could see were
true but couldn't not the Hans Christian Andersen tale about the Emperor's

New Clothes, but prove, not in a million years? Or did it seem obvious to
you that, if you the Arthurian romance of the Sword in the Stone.
Somebody (our hero, of yourself were unable to devise a proof of some
candidate geometric truth, course) has a special, perhaps even magical,
property which is quite invisible this would just be a sign of your own
personal frailty? Perhaps you thought: under most circumstances, but which
can be made to reveal itself quite

"There has to be a proof, since it's true, even if I myself can never find it!"

unmistakably in special circumstances: if you can pull the sword from the
That's an intensely plausible opinion, but what Gödel proved, beyond any
stone, you have the property; if you can't, you don't. This is a feat or a
failure doubt, is that when it comes to axiomatizing simple arithmetic ( not
plane that everyone can see; it doesn't require any special interpretation or
special geometry), there are truths that "we can see" to be true but that can
never be pleading on one's own behalf. Pull out the sword and you win,
hands down.

formally proved to be true. Actually, this claim must be carefully hedged:
for What Godel's Theorem promises the romantically inclined is a similarly
any particular axiom system that is consistent (not subtly self-dramatic
proof of the specialness of the human mind. Godel's Theorem contradictory
—a disqualifying flaw), there must be a sentence of arithmetic, defines a
deed, it seems, that a genuine human mind can perform but that no now
known as the Godel sentence of that system, that is not provable within
impostor, no mere algorithm-controlled robot, could perform. The technical
the system but is true. (In fact, there must be many such true sentences, but
details of Godel's proof itself need not concern us; no mathematician one is
all we need to make the point.) We can change systems, and prove that 430
THE EMPEROR'S NEW MIND, AND OTHER FABLES

The Sword in the Stone 431

first Godel sentence in the next axiom system we choose, but it in turn will
edly, at least some part of such a human being cannot be a mere machine,
spawn its own Godel sentence, if it is consistent, and so on forever. No
single even a huge collection of gadgets. If hearts are pumping machines,

and lungs consistent axiomatization of arithmetic can prove all the truths of
arithmetic.

are air-exchanging machines, and brains are computing machines, then This
might not seem to matter very much, since we seldom if ever want to
mathematicians' minds cannot be their brains, Godel thought, since prove
facts of arithmetic; we just take arithmetic for granted without proof.

mathematicians' minds can do something that no mere computing machine
But it is possible to devise Euclid-type axiom systems for arithmetic—

can do.

Peano's axioms, for instance—and prove such simple truths as "2 + 2 = 4,"

What, exactly, can they do? This is the problem of defining the feat for the
such obvious middle-level truths as "numbers evenly divisible by 10 are
also big empirical test. It is tempting to think we have already seen an
example: evenly divisible by 2," and such unobvious truths as "There is no
largest they can do what you used to do when you looked at the blackboard
in prime number." Before Godel devised his proof, the goal of deriving all
geometry class—using something like "intuition" or "judgment" or "pure
mathematical truth from a single set of axioms was widely regarded by
understanding," they can just see that certain propositions of arithmetic are
mathematicians and logicians as their great project, difficult but within
reach, true. The idea would be that they don't need to rely on grubby
algorithms to the moon landing or Human Genome Project of the
mathematics of the day.

generate their mathematical knowledge, since they have a talent for
grasping But it absolutely can't be done. That is what Gödel's Theorem
establishes.

mathematical truth that transcends algorithmic processes alto-gether.

Now, what does this have to do with Artificial Intelligence or evolution?

Remember that an algorithm is a recipe that can be followed by servile
Godel proved his theorem some years before the invention of the electronic
dunces—or even machines; no understanding is required. Clever computer,
but then Alan Turing came along and extended the implications of
mathematicians seem, in contrast, to be able to use their understanding to
go that abstract theorem by showing, in effect, that any formal proof
procedure beyond what such mechanical dunces can do. But although this
seems to be of the sort covered by Godel's Theorem is equivalent to a
computer program.

what Gödel himself thought, and it certainly expresses the general popular
Godel had devised a way of putting all possible axiom systems in
understanding of what Gödel's Theorem shows, it is much harder to

"alphabetical order." In fact, they can all be lined up in the Library of Babel,
demonstrate than first appears. How can we distinguish a case of somebody
and Turing then showed that this set was a subset of another set in the (or
something) "grasping the truth" of a mathematical sentence from a case
Library of Babel: the set of all possible computers. It doesn't matter what of
somebody (or something) just wildly guessing correctly, for instance? You
material you make a computer out of; what matters is the algorithm it runs;
could train a parrot to utter "true" and "false" when various symbols were
and since every algorithm is finitely specifiable, it is possible to devise a
written on the blackboard in front of it; how many correct guesses without
an uniform language for uniquely describing each algorithm and putting all
the error would the parrot have to make for us to be justified in believing
that the specifications in "alphabetical order." Turing devised just such a
system, and parrot had an immaterial mind after all (or perhaps was just a
human in it every computer—from your laptop to the grandest parallel
supercom-mathematician in a parrot costume) (Hofstadter 1979)?

puter that will ever be built—has a unique description as what we now call
a This is the problem that has always given fits to those who want to use
Turing machine. The Turing machines can each be given a unique iden-
Gödel's Theorem to prove that our minds are skyhooks, not just boring old
tification number—its Library of Babel Number, if you like. Gödel's Theo-
cranes. It won't do to say that mathematicians, unlike machines, can prove

rem can then be reinterpreted to say that each of those Turing machines that
any truth of arithmetic, for, if what we mean by "prove" is what Gödel
means happens to be a consistent algorithm for proving truths of arithmetic
(and, not by "prove" in his proof, then Gödel shows that human beings—or
angels, if surprisingly, these are a Vast but Vanishing subset of all the
possible Turing such there be—cannot do it either (Dennett 1970); there is
no formal proof of machines) has associated with it a Gödel sentence—a
truth of arithmetic it a system's Gödel sentence within the system. A famous
early attempt to cannot prove. So that is what Gödel, anchored by Turing to
the world of harness Gödel's Theorem was by the philosopher J. R. Lucas
(1961; see also computers, tells us: every computer that is a consistent
truth-of-arithmetic-1970), who decided to define the crucial feat as
"producing as true" a certain prover has an Achilles' heel, a truth it can
never prove, even if it runs till sentence—some Gödel sentence or other.
This definition runs into insoluble doomsday. But so what?

problems of interpretation, however, ruining the "sword-in-the stone"

Gödel himself thought that the implication of his theorem was that human
definitiveness of the empirical side of the argument ( Dennett 1970, 1972;
beings—at least the mathematicians among us—cannot, then, be just see
also Hofstadter 1979). We can see more clearly what the problem is by
machines, because they can do things no machine could do. More point-
considering several related feats, real and imaginary.

Rene Descartes, in 1637, asked himself how one could tell a genuine 432
THE EMPEROR'S NEW MIND, AND OTHER FABLES

The Sword in the Stone 433

human being from any machine, and he came up with "two very certain

"innconceivable," and even if, as many today believe, no machine will ever
means":

succeed in passing the Turing Test, almost no one today would claim that
the very idea is inconceivable. Perhaps this sea-change in public opinion
has The first is that they [the machines] could never use words, or put

together been helped along by the comouter's progress on other feats, such
as playing other signs, as we do in order to declare our thoughts to others.
For we can checkers and chess. In an address in 1957, Herbert Simon
(Simon and certainly conceive of a machine so constructed that it utters
words, and Newell 1958) predicted that computer would be the world chess
champion in even utters words which correspond to bodily actions causing
a change in less than a decade, a classic case of overoptimism, as it turns
out. A few its organs (e.g., if you touch it in one spot it asks what you want
of it, if you years later, the philosopher Hubert Dreyfus (1965) predicted
that no touch it in another it cries out that you are hurting it, and so on). But
it is computer would ever be able to play good chess, since playing chess
not conceivable that such a machine should produce different arrange-
required "insight," but he himself was soon trounced at chess by a computer
ments of words so as to give an appropriately meaningful answer to what-
program, an occasion for much glee among AI researchers. Art Samuel's
ever is said in its presence, as the dullest of men can do. Secondly, even
checkers program has been followed by literally hundreds of chess-playing
though such machines might do some things as well as we do them, or
programs, which now compete in tournaments against both human and
other perhaps even better, they would inevitably fail in others, which would
computer contestants, and will probably soon be able to beat the best
human reveal that they were acting not through understanding but only
from the chess players in the

disposition of their organs. For whereas reason is a universal instrument
world.

which can be used in all kinds of situations, these organs need some
particular disposition for each particular action; hence it is for all practical
But is chess-playing a suitable "sword-in-the-stone" test? Dreyfus may
purposes impossible for a machine to have enough different organs to once
have thought so, and he has a distinguished predecessor—Edgar Allan
make it act in all the contingencies of life in the way in which our reason
Poe, of all people—whose certainty on this score drove him to unmask one
makes us act. [Descartes 1637, pt. 5.]

of the great hoaxes of the nineteenth century, von Kempelen's chess
"automaton." In the eighteenth century, the great Vaucanson had made me-
Alan Turing, in 1950, asked himself the same question, and came up with
chanical marvels that entranced the nobility, and other paying customers, by
just the same acid test—somewhat more rigorously described—what he
exhibiting behaviors that even today inspire our skepticism. Could Vau-
called the imitation game, and we now call the Turing Test. Put two con-
canson's clockwork duck really do what it is reported to have done? "When
testants—one human, one a computer—in boxes (in effect) and conduct
corn was thrown down before it, the duck stretched out its neck to pick it
up, conversations with each; if the computer can convince you it is the
human swallowed, and digested it" (Poe 1836a, p. 1255). Other ingenious
artificers being, it wins the imitation game. Turing's verdict, however, was
strikingly and tricksters had followed in Vaucanson's wake, developing the
art of different from Descartes's:

mechanical simulacra to such a high pitch that one of them, Baron von
Kempelen, in 1769, could exploit public fascination with such devices by I
believe that in about fifty years' time it will be possible to program creating
a deliberate tease: a purported automaton that could play chess.

computers, with a storage capacity of about 109, to make them play the Von
Kempelen's original machine passed into the hands of Johann Nep-imitation
game so well that an average interrogator will not have more omuk
Maelzel,1 who made some improvements and revisions, and then than a 70
percent chance of making the right identification after five min-caused quite
a stir in the early nineteenth century by exhibiting Maelzel's utes of
questioning. The original question, 'Can machines think?' I believe Chess-
Machine, never quite guaranteeing that it was just a machine, and to be too
meaningless to deserve discussion. Nevertheless I believe that at
surrounding the whole performance (for which he charged a pretty penny )
the end of the century the use of words and general educated opinion will
with enough of the standard magician's ostentations to arouse anybody's
have altered so much that one will be able to speak of machines thinking
without expecting to be contradicted. [Turing 1950, p. 435.]

Turing has already been proven right about his last prophecy: "the use of 1.
This same Maelzel is the inventor (or perfecter) of the metronome, and
made the ear words and general educated opinion" has already "altered so
much" that one tnumpet that Beethoven relied on for years, once he began
to go deaf. Maelzel also can speak of machines thinking without expecting
to be contradicted— "on created a mechanical orchestra, the
Panharmonicon, for which Beethoven wrote Well-general principles."
Descartes found the notion of a thinking machine ington's Victory, but the
two had a falling out over property rights to that composition—

Maelzel was both a crane-maker and crane-stealer of great talent.

434 THE EMPEROR'S NEW MIND, AND OTHER FABLES

The Sword in the Stone 435

suspicions. An obviously mechanical swami figure sat at a suspiciously en-
FIGURE 15.1. Von Kempelen's

closed cabinet, the doors and drawers of which were sequentially opened
(but chess automaton.

never all at once), permitting the audience to "see" that there was nothing
but machinery inside. The swami figure then commenced to play a game of
that man is capable to impart intellect to matter: for mind is no less chess,
picking up and moving the chess pieces on a board in response to the
requisite in the operations of the game of chess, than it is in the prosecu-
moves of a human opponent—and usually winning! But was there, literally,
a tion of a chain of abstract reasoning. We recommend those, whose credu-
homunculus inside, a little man doing all the mind-work? If AI is possible,

lity has in this instance been taken captive by plausible appearance; and all,
the cabinet could be filled with some collection or other of cranes and other
whether credulous or not, who admire an ingenious train of inductive
reasoning, to read this article attentively: each and all must arise from its
bits of machinery. If AI is impossible, then there must be a skyhook in the
perusal convinced that a mere machine cannot bring into requisition the
cabinet, a Mind pretending to be a Machine.

intellect which this intricate game demands.... [Poe 1836b, p. 89.]

Poe was absolutely certain that Maelzel's machine concealed a human
being, and his ingenious sleuthing confirmed his suspicions, which he de-
We now know that, however convincing this argument used to be, its back
scribed in detail with an appropriate air of triumph in an article in the has
been broken by Darwin, and the particular conclusion Poe drew about
Southern Literary Messenger (1836a). At least as interesting as his
reasoning chess has been definitively refuted by the generation of artificers
following about how the hoax was perpetrated is his reasoning, in a letter
accom-in Art Samuel's footsteps. What, though, of Descartes's test—now
known as panying the publication of his article, about why it had to be a
hoax, a line of the Turing Test? That has generated controversy ever since
Turing proposed argument that perfectly echoes John Locke's "proof" (back
in chapter 1): his nicely operationalized version of it, and has even led to a
series of real, if restricted, competitions, which confirm what everybody
who had thought We have never, at any time, given assent to the prevailing
opinion, that carefully about the Turing Test already knew (Dennett 1985):
it is human agency is not employed by Mr. Maelzel. That such agency is
em-embarrassingly easy to fool the naive judges, and astronomically ployed
cannot be questioned, unless it may be satisfactorily demonstrated 436 THE
EMPEROR'S NEW MIND, AND OTHER FABLES

The Library of Toshiba 437

difficult to fool the expert judges—a problem, once more, of not having a
proper "sword-in-the-stone" feat to settle the issue. Holding a conversation
or argument, but, in Penrose's eyes, they didn't agree on what "the" lethal
flaw winning a chess match is not a suitable feat, the former because it is
too was. This was itself a measure of how widely he had missed the mark,

since open-ended for a contestant to secure unambiguous victory in spite of
its the critics had found many different ways of zeroing in on one big
misunderstanding, about the very nature of AI and its use of algorithms.

severe difficulty, and the latter because it is demonstrably within the power
of a machine after all. Might the implications of Godel's Theorem provide a
better contest? Suppose we put a mathematician in box A and a computer—

any computer you like—in box B, and ask each of them questions about the
2. THE LIBRARY OF TOSHIBA

truth and falsehood of sentences of arithmetic. Would this be a test that
would surely unmask the machine? The trouble is that human
mathematicians The people who are going to like the book best, however,
will probably all make mistakes, and Godel's Theorem offers no verdict at
all about the be those who don't understand it. As an evolutionary biologist,
I have likelihood, let alone impossibility, of less-than-perfect truth detection
by an learned over the years that most people do not want to see themselves
algorithm. It does not appear, then, that there is any fair arithmetic test we
as lumbering robots programmed to ensure the survival of their genes. I can
put to the boxes that will clearly distinguish the man from the machine.

don't think they will want to see themselves as digital computers either.

This difficulty had been widely seen as systematically blocking any argu-To
be told by someone with impeccable scientific credentials that they ment
from Godel's Theorem to the impossibility of AI. Certainly everybody are
nothing of the kind can only be pleasing.

in AI has always known about Godel's Theorem, and they have all
continued,

—JOHN MAYNARD SMITH 1990 (

unworried, with their labors. In fact, Hofstadter's classic Godel Escher Bach
review of Penrose )

(1979) can be read as the demonstration that Godel is an unwilling
champion of AI, providing essential insights about the paths to follow to
strong AI, not Consider the set of all Turing machines—in other words, the
set of all showing the futility of the field. But Roger Penrose, Rouse Ball
Professor of possible algorithms. Or, rather, to ease the task of imagination,
consider Mathematics at Oxford, and one of the world's leading
mathematical instead a Vast but finite subset of them, relativized to a
particular language, physicists, thinks otherwise. His challenge has to be
taken seriously, even if, and consisting of "volumes" of a particular length:
the set of all possible as I and others in AI are convinced, he is making a
fairly simple mistake. When strings of 0 and 1 (bit strings), up to the length
of one megabyte (eight Penrose's book appeared, I pointed out the problem
in a review: his argument million 0's and l's). Consider the reader of these
strings to be my old laptop is highly convoluted, and bristling with details
of physics and mathematics, computer, a Toshiba T-1200, with its twenty-
megabyte hard disk (we'll prohibit using any additional memory, just for
finiteness' sake). It should and it is unlikely that such an enterprise would
succumb to a single, come as no surprise that the Vast majority of these bit
strings do nothing at crashing oversight on the part of its creator—that the
argument could be all worth mentioning if an attempt is made to "run" them
as programs on the

'refuted' by any simple observation. So I am reluctant to credit my obser-
Toshiba. Programs, after all, are not random strings of bits, but highly
vation that Penrose seems to make a fairly elementary error right at the
designed sequences of bits, the products of thousands of hours of R and D.

beginning, and at any rate fails to notice or rebut what seems to be an The
fanciest program that ever could be is still something that can be obvious
objection. [Dennett 1989b.]

expressed as one or another string of 0's and l's, and although my old
Toshiba is too small to run some of the truly huge programs that have been
devised, it is quite capable of running a handsome and representative subset
of them: My surprise and disbelief were soon echoed, first by the usual
assortment word-processors, spread sheets, chess-players, Artificial Life
simulations, of commentators to a target article (based on his book) by

Penrose in Be-logic-proof-checkers, and, yes, even a few automatic
arithmetic-truth-havioral and Brain Sciences, and then by Penrose in turn.
In "The Nonal-provers. Call any such runnable program, actual or
envisaged, an interesting gorithmic Mind" (1990), Penrose's reply to his
critics, he expressed mild program (it is roughly analogous to a readable
book, actual or imaginary, in astonishment at the strong language some of
them used: "quite fallacious,"

the Library of Babel, or a viable genotype in the Library of Mendel). We

"wrong," "lethal flaw" and "inexplicable mistake," "invalid," "deeply
flawed."

don't have to worry about the boundary separating the interesting from the
The AI community was, not surprisingly, united in its dismissal of Penrose's
uninteresting; when in doubt, throw it out. No matter how we rule, there are
Vastly many interesting programs in the Library of

438 THE EMPEROR'S NEW MIND, AND OTHER FABLES

The Library of Toshiba 439

Toshiba, but they are Vanishingly hard to "find"—that's why software com-
certain proposition follows from the soundness of a certain system. He then
panies make quite a few millionaires along with their software.

goes to some length to argue that there could be no algorithm, or at any rate
Now, every megabyte-length bit string is an algorithm in one sense—the no
practical algorithm, "for" mathematical insight. But, in going to all this
sense that matters to us: it is a recipe, stupid or wise, that can be followed
by trouble, he overlooks the possibility that some algorithm—many
different a mechanism, my Toshiba. If we try bit strings at random, most of
the time algorithms, in fact—might yield mathematical insight even though
that was the Toshiba will just sit there emitting a faint hum (it won't even
flash an not just what it was "for." We can see the mistake clearly in a
parallel amber light); there are Vastly more ways of being a dead program
than a live argument.

one, to echo Dawkins. Only a Vanishing subset of these algorithms are
Chess is a finite game (since there are rules for terminating go-nowhere
interesting in any way at all, and only a Vanishing subset of them have
games as draws). That means that there is, in principle, an algorithm for
anything at all to do with truths of arithmetic, and only a Vanishing subset
of determining either checkmate or a draw—I have no idea which. In fact, I
can these attempt to generate formal proofs of arithmetical truths, and only
a specify the algorithm for you quite simply: (1) Draw the entire decision
tree Vanishing subset of those are consistent. Godel shows us that not a
single of all possible chess games (a Vast but finite number). (2) Go to the
end node one of the algorithms in that subset ( and there are still Vastly
many of them, of each game; it will be either a win for white or black, or a
draw. (3) "Color"

even for my little Toshiba) can generate proofs of all the truths of
arithmetic.

the node black, white, or gray, depending on the outcome. (4) Work But
Godel's Theorem tells us nothing at all about any other algorithm in
backwards, one whole step ( one white move plus one black move ) at a
time; the Library of Toshiba. It does not tell us whether there are any
algorithms if on the previous move all the paths from any one of white's
moves lead that can play decent chess. There are in fact Vastly many, and a
few actual through all black's responses to a white-colored node, color that
node white ones reside on my actual Toshiba, and I've never beaten any of
them! It does and move back again, and so forth. (5 ) Do the same for any
guaranteed not tell us whether there are any algorithms that are pretty darn
good at winning paths for black. (6) Color all other nodes gray. At the end
of this playing the Turing Test or imitation game. In fact, there is one actual
one on procedure (way past the universe's bedtime), you will have colored
in every my Toshiba, a stripped-down version of Joseph Weizenbaum's
famous ELIZA node of the tree of all possible chess games, leading back to
white's opening program, and I have seen it fool uninitiated people into
concluding, like move. Now it is time to play. If any one of the twenty legal
moves is colored Edgar Allan Poe, that there must be a human being issuing
the answers. At white, take it! There is a guaranteed checkmate ahead that
can be reached just first I was baffled by how any sane human being could

think there was a tiny by always staying on the white nodes. Shun any black
move, of course, since guy in my laptop Toshiba, sitting, unattached to
anything, on a card table, but that opens up a guaranteed win for your
opponent. If there are no white I had forgotten how resourceful a persuaded
mind can be—there must be, moves at the outset, choose a gray move, and
hope that sometime later in the these wily skeptics concluded, a cellular
phone in my Toshiba!

game you'll be offered a white move. The worst you can do is a draw. (If all
Godel's Theorem in particular has nothing at all to tell us about whether the
opening moves for white are colored black, most improbably, your only
there might be algorithms in the Library of Toshiba that could do an im-
hope is to choose one at random and hope that your opponent, playing
black, pressive job of "producing as true" or "detecting as true or false"
candidate goofs at some later stage of play and lets you escape by getting
on a gray or a sentences of arithmetic. If human mathematicians can do an
impressive job white path.)

of "just seeing" with "mathematical intuition" that certain propositions are
That is an algorithm, clearly. No step in the recipe requires any insight, and
true, perhaps a computer can imitate this talent, the same way it can imitate
I have specified it unambiguously in a finite form. The trouble is that it is
not chess-playing and conversation-holding: imperfectly, but impressively.
That remotely feasible or practical, because the tree it exhaustively searches
is is exactly what people in AI believe: that there are risky, heuristic
algorithms Vast. But I suppose it is nice to know that in principle there is an
algorithm for human intelligence in general, just as there are for playing
good checkers for playing perfect chess, however useless. There might be a
feasible and good chess and a thousand other tasks. And here is where
Penrose made algorithm for playing perfect chess. No one has ever found
one, thank his big mistake: he ignored this set of possible algorithms— the
only set of goodness, since it would turn chess into a game of scarcely more
interest than algorithms that AI has ever concerned itself with—and
concentrated on the tic-tac-toe. No one knows whether there is such a
feasible algorithm, but the set of algorithms that Godel's Theorem actually
tells us something about.

general consensus is that it is very unlikely. Not knowing for sure, let's
choose Mathematicians, Penrose says, use "mathematical insight" to see
that a the supposition that makes for the worst case for AI. Let's suppose
that there is no feasible algorithm for checkmate or a guaranteed draw—
none at all.

440 THE EMPEROR'S NEW MIND, AND OTHER FABLES

The Library of Toshiba 441

Does it follow that no algorithm running on my Toshiba can achieve be
capable of indefinitely resourceful discrimination and planning; they must
checkmate? Hardly! As I have already confessed, the chess algorithms on
my be good at recognizing food and shelter, telling friend from foe, learning
to Toshiba are undefeated in play against one human being—me. I'm not
very discriminate harbingers of spring as harbingers of spring, telling good
argu-good, but I expect I have about as much "insight" as the next human
being.

ments from bad, and even—as a sort of bonus talent thrown in—
recognizing Someday I might beat my machine, if I practiced a lot and
worked very hard, mathematical truths as mathematical truths. Of course,
such "Darwinian al-but the programs on my Toshiba are trivial compared
with the current gorithms" ( Cosmides and Tooby 1989) wouldn't have been
designed just for champion chess programs. About them you could safely
bet your life that this special purpose, any more than our eyes were
designed for telling italics they would checkmate me (though not Bobby
Fischer) every time. I don't from boldface, but that doesn't mean that they
aren't superbly sensitive to recommend to anyone that you actually bet your
life on the relative excel-such differences if given a chance to consider
them.

lence of these algorithms—I might improve, and I wouldn't want your death
Now how could Penrose have overlooked this retrospectively obvious on
my conscience—but in fact, if Darwinism is right, you and your ancestors
possibility? He is a mathematician, and mathematicians are primarily inter-
have an unbroken string of successful gambles for similarly fatal stakes on
ested in that Vanishing subset of algorithms that they can prove, mathemat-

the algorithms embodied in your "machinery." That is what organisms have
ically, to have mathematically interesting powers. I call this the God's-eye
done, every day since life began: they have bet their lives that the
algorithms view of algorithms. It is analogous to the God's-eye view of
volumes in the that built them, and that operate within them if they are
among the lucky Library of Babel. We can "prove" (for what it is worth)
that there is a single organisms with brains, will keep them alive long
enough to have children.

volume in the Library of Babel that lists, in perfect alphabetical order, all
the Mother Nature has never aspired to absolute certainty; a good risk is
enough telephone subscribers in New York City whose net worth on
January 10, for her. So we would expect that, if mathematicians' brains are
running 1994, was more than a million dollars. There has to be—there
couldn't be algorithms, they will be algorithms that happen to do pretty well
in the truth-that many millionaire phone-owners in New York, and so some
one of the detecting department, without being foolproof.

possible volumes in the Library must list them all. But finding it—or
making The chess algorithms on my Toshiba, like all algorithms, yield
guaranteed it—would be a huge empirical task fraught with uncertainties
and judgment results, but what they are guaranteed to do is not checkmate
me, but just play calls, even if we just considered it to be a subset of the
names already printed legal chess. That is all they are "for." Of the Vast
number of algorithms in the actual phone book as of that date (ignoring all
those with unlisted numbers ). Even though we can't put our hands on this
volume, we can name guaranteed to play legal chess, some are much better
than others, though none it—just the way we named Mitochondrial Eve.
Call it Megaphone. Now, we is guaranteed a win against any other—at least
this is not the sort of thing one can prove things about Megaphone, for
instance, the first letter printed on the would hope to prove mathematically,
even if, as a matter of brute first page on which there is printing is "A," but
the first letter on the last page mathematical fact, the initial state of program
x and program y were such that on which there is printing is not "A." (This
is not quite up to the standards of x would win all possible games against y.
This means that the following mathematical proof, of course, but what are
the odds that none of the people argument is fallacious:

with phones whose names begin with "A" is a million aire, or that there's
only one page of such millionaires in all New York?) x is excellent at
achieving checkmate;

As I noted on page 52, when mathematicians think about algorithms, it is
there is no (practical) algorithm for checkmate in chess; usually from the
God's-eye perspective. They are interested in proving, for therefore: the
explanation of x' s talent cannot be that x is running an instance, that there is
some algorithm with some interesting property, or that algorithm.

there is no such algorithm, and in order to prove such things you needn't
actually locate the algorithm you are talking about—by picking it out from
a The conclusion is obviously false: the algorithm level of explanation is
pile of algorithms stored on floppy disks, for instance. Our inability to
locate exactly the right level at which to explain the power of my Toshiba to
beat (the remains of) Mitochondrial Eve did not prevent us from deducing
facts me at chess. It's not as if it had particularly potent electricity running
through about her either. The empirical issue of identification thus doesn't
often arise it, or a secret reservoir of elan vital inside its plastic case. What
makes it for such formal deductions. Godel's Theorem tells us that not a
single one of better than other chess-playing computers (I can beat the
really simple ones) the algorithms that can run on my Toshiba ( or any other
computer ) has a is that it has a better algorithm.

certain mathematically interesting property: being a consistent generator of
What kind of algorithms, then, might mathematicians be running? Algo-
proofs of arithmetic facts that generates them all if given enough run time.

rithms "for" trying to stay alive. As we saw in our consideration of the
survival-machine robots in the last chapter, such algorithms would have to
442 THE EMPEROR'S NEW MIND, AND OTHER FABLES

The Library of Toshiba 443

That is interesting, but it doesn't help us much. Lots of interesting things He
goes on to dismiss his second loophole (the unsound algorithm) by can be
proved, mathematically, about each and every member of various sets
claiming (1991): "Mathematicians require a degree of rigour that makes

such of algorithms. Applying that knowledge in the real world is another
matter, heuristic arguments unacceptable—so no such known procedure of
this kind and that is the blind spot that led Penrose to overlook AI
altogether, instead can be the way that mathematicians actually operate."
This is a more of refuting it, as he hoped. This has come out quite clearly in
his subsequent interesting mistake, for with it he raises the prospect that the
crucial attempts at reformulation of his claim in response to his critics.

empirical test would be not to put a single mathematician "in the box" but
the whole mathematical community! Penrose sees the theoretical
importance of Given any particular algorithm, that algorithm cannot be the
procedure the added power that human mathematicians obtain by pooling
their whereby human mathematicians ascertain mathematical truth. Hence
resources, communicating with each other, and hence becoming a sort of
humans are not using algorithms at all to ascertain truth. [Penrose 1990,
single giant mind that is hugely more reliable than any one homunculus we
p. 696.]

might put in the box. It is not that mathematicians have fancier brains than
Human mathematicians are not using a knowably sound algorithm in order
the rest of us (or than chimpanzees) but that they have mind-tools—the to
ascertain mathematical truth. [Penrose 1991.]

social institutions in which mathematicians present each other their proofs,
check each other out, make mistakes in public, and then count on the public
In the more recent of these, he goes on to consider and close various to
correct those mistakes. This does indeed give the mathematics community

"loopholes," of which two in particular concern us. mathematicians might
be powers to discern mathematical truth that dwarf the powers of any
individual using "a horrendously complicated unknowable algorithm X" or
"an unsound human brain (even an individual brain with paper-and-pencil
peripherals, a (but presumably approximately sound) algorithm Y." Penrose
presents these hand calculator, or a laptop!). But this does not show that
human minds are loopholes as if they were ad hoc responses to the
challenge of Godel's not algorithmic devices; on the contrary, it shows how
the cranes of culture Theorem, instead of the standard working assumptions

of AI. Of the first he can exploit human brains in distributed algorithmic
processes that have no says:

discernible limits.

This seems to be totally at variance with what mathematicians seem ac-
Penrose doesn't quite see it that way. He goes on to say that "it is our tually
to be doing when they express their arguments in terms that can ( at general
(non-algorithmic) ability to understand" that accounts for our least in
principle ) be broken down into assertions that are 'obvious', and
mathematical abilities, and then he concludes: "It was not an algorithm x
agreed by all. I would regard it as far-fetched in the extreme to believe that
that was favoured, in Man ( at least) by natural selection, but this
wonderful it is really the horrendous unknowable X, rather than these
simple and ability to understand!" (Penrose 1991). Here he commits the
fallacy I just obvious ingredients [emphasis added], that lies lurking behind
all our exposed using the chess example. Penrose wants to argue:
mathematical understanding. [Penrose 1991]

x can understand;

These "ingredients" are indeed wielded by us all in an apparently nonal-
there is no feasible algorithm for understanding;

gorithmic way, but this phenomenological fact is misleading. Penrose pays
therefore: what natural selection selected, the whatever-it-is that accounts
careful attention to what it is like to be a mathematician, but he overlooks a
for understanding, is not an algorithm.

possibility—indeed, a likelihood—that is familiar to AI researchers: the
possibility that underlying our general capacity to deal with such "ingre-
This conclusion is a non sequitur. If the mind is an algorithm (contrary to
dients" is a heuristic program of mind-boggling complexity. Such a compli-
Penrose's claim), surely it is not an algorithm that is recognizable to, or
cated algorithm would approximate the competence of the perfect
accessible to, those whose minds it creates. It is, in his terms, unknowable.

understander, and be "invisible" to its beneficiary. Whenever we say we As
a product of biological design processes ( both genetic and individual), it
solved some problem "by intuition," all that really means is we don't know
is almost certainly one of those algorithms that are somewhere or other in
the how we solved it. The simplest way of modeling "intuition" in a
computer is Vast space of interesting algorithms, full of typographical errors
or "bugs,"

simply denying the computer program any access to its own inner
workings.

but good enough to bet your life on—so far. Penrose sees this as a "far-
Whenever it solves a problem, and you ask it how it solved the problem, it
fetched" possibility, but if that is all he can say against it, he has not yet
should respond: "I don't know; it just came to me by intuition" (Dennett
come to grips with the best version of "strong AI."

1968).

444 THE EMPEROR'S NEW MIND, AND OTHER FABLES

The Phantom Quantum-Gravity Computer 445

3. THE PHANTOM QUANTUM-GRAVITY COMPUTER:

Moreover, in the wake of the commentary his book provoked, Penrose
LESSONS FROM LAPLAND

now grants that heuristic programs are algorithms as well, and
acknowledges that, if he is to find an argument against AI, he has to
concede their tremendous power to track the truths of arithmetic and
everything else, if not I am a strong believer in the power of natural
selection. But I do not see perfectly, then at least impressively. He offers a
further point of clarification: how natural selection, in itself, can evolve
algorithms which could have any computer that operates by indulging in
interactions with an external the kind of conscious judgements of the
validity of other algorithms that environment is an algorithmic computer
provided the external environment is we seem to have.

itself entirely algorithmic. (If skyhooks grew like toadstools—or, more to
the

—ROGER PENROSE 1989, p. 414

point, like oracles perched on toadstools—and a computer was helped along
by its occasional communication with these skyhooks, then what it did
would

/ don't think the brain came in the Darwinian manner. In fact, it is be no
algorithm.)

disprovable. Simple mechanisms can't yield the brain. I think the basic
Now, with all this useful clarification in place, what does Penrose main-
elements of the universe are simple. Life force is a primitive element of
tain? In May 1993, I spent a week with Penrose and some Swedish
physicists the universe and it obeys certain laws of action. These laws are
not and other scientists discussing our different views about these matters,
at a simple and not mechanical

workshop in Abisko, a tundra-research station well north of the Arctic
Circle

—K

in Sweden. Perhaps the midnight sun helped as much as our Swedish hosts
to URT GODEL

illuminate the path, but, in any event, I think we both came away When
Penrose insists that the brain is no Turing machine, it is important to
enlightened. Penrose proposes a revolution in physics, centered on a new—

understand what he is not saying. He is not making the obvious (and and
still unformulated—theory of "quantum gravity," which he hopes will
obviously irrelevant) claim that the brain is not well modeled by Turing's
explain how the human brain transcends the limitations of algorithms. Does

original thought-device: a smallish gadget sitting astride a paper tape, ex-
Penrose envisage the human brain, with its special quantum-physics
powers, amining one square of the tape at a time. Nobody ever thought
otherwise. He to be a skyhook or a crane? That was the question I went to
Sweden to answer, and the answer I came back with is this: He has
definitely been is also not merely saying that the brain is not a serial
computer, a "von looking for a skyhook. I think he'd settle for a new crane
—but I doubt that Neumann machine,'' but, rather, a massively parallel
computer. And he is not he's found one.

just saying that the brain makes use of randomness or pseudo-randomness
in Descartes and Locke, and more recently Edgar Allan Poe, Kurt Godel,
and running its algorithms. He sees—though some others have not—that J.
R. Lucas, thought that the alternative to a "mechanical" mind would be an
algorithms availing themselves of large doses of randomness are still
immaterial mind, or a soul, to speak with tradition. Hubert Dreyfus and
John algorithms within the purview of Artificial Intelligence, and still fall
under Searle, more recent skeptics about AI, have shunned such dualism
and opined the limitations Godel's Theorem places on all Turing machines,
of whatever that the mind is indeed just the brain, but the brain is not any
ordinary size and shape.3

computer; it has "causal powers" (Searle 1985) that go beyond the running
of any algorithms. Neither Dreyfus nor Searle has been very forthcoming
about what special powers these might be, or which of the physical sciences
might be the right one to give an account of them, but others have wondered
2. A remark made in 1971, quoted in Wang 1993, p. 133. See also Wang
1974, p. 326: whether physics might hold the key. To many of them,
Penrose appears to be

"Godel believes that mechanism in biology is a prejudice of our time which
will be a knight in shining armor.

disproved. In this case, one disproval, in Godel's opinion, will consist in a
mathematical Quantum physics to the rescue! Several different proposals
have been theorem to the effect that the formation within geological times
of a human body by the laws of physics ( or any other laws of a similar
nature ), starting from a random distribu-advanced over the years about how

quantum effects might be harnessed to tion of the elementary particles and
the field, is as unlikely as the separation by chance give the brain special
powers beyond those of any ordinary computer. J. R.

of the atmosphere into its components."

3. Someone who doesn't realize this is Gerald Edelman, whose "neural
Darwinism"

everybody in AI knows, that although you may not have "Absolute
Ignorance" (as Mac-simulations are both parallel and heavily stochastic
(involving randomness), a fact he Kenzie anonymously put it, back in
chapter 3, p 65), you still don't have to understand often cites, mistakenly,
as evidence that his models are not algorithms, and that he himself what
you are making in order to make it.

is not engaged in "strong AI" ( e.g., Edelman 1992 ). He is; his protestations
to the contrary betray an elementary misunderstanding of computers, but
that just goes to show, as 446 THE EMPEROR'S NEW MIND, AND
OTHER FABLES

The Phantom Quantum-Gravity Computer 447

Lucas (1970) yearned to drag quantum physics into this arena, but he
thought Final Theory (Weinberg, you will recall from chapter 3, gave two
cheers for that the indeterminacy gaps of quantum physics would permit a
Cartesian reductionism), Penrose mused as follows:

spirit to intercede, twiddling the neurons, in effect, to get some extra mind-
power out of the brain, a doctrine that has also been energetically defended
In my view, if there is to be a Final Theory, it could only be a scheme of by
Sir John Eccles, the Nobel-laureate neurophysiologist who has a very
different nature. Rather than being a physical theory in the ordinary
scandalized his colleagues for years with his unabashed dualism (Eccles
sense, it would have to be something more like a principle—a mathemat-
1953, Popper and Eccles 1977). This is not the time and place for me to ical
principle whose implementation might itself involve nonmechanical review

the reasons for dismissing this dualism—the times and places are subtlety
(and perhaps even creativity). [Penrose 1993, p. 82.]

Dennett 1991a, 1993d—since Penrose shuns dualism as vigorously as
anybody else in the materialist camp. What is refreshing about his attack on
So it is not surprising that Penrose has expressed grave skepticism about AI,
in fact, is his insistence that he hopes to replace it with something that
Darwinism. And the grounds he gives are familiar: he can't imagine how
would still be a physical science of the mind, not some unexplorable
mystery

"natural selection of algorithms" could do all that good work: that takes
place in the never-never-land of dualism.

[T]here are serious difficulties with the picture whereby algorithms are
Without abandoning the physical sphere, we might get some strange new
supposed to improve themselves in this way. It would certainly not work
powers out of subatomic particles, according to recent speculations about
for normal Turing machine specifications, since a 'mutation' would almost

"quantum computers" (Deutsch 1985). Such a quantum computer would
take certainly render the machine totally useless instead of altering it only
advantage (it is claimed) of the "superposition of eigenstates" prior to the
slightly. [Penrose 1990, p. 654.]

"collapse of the wave packet" in order to check out Vast (yes, Vast) search
spaces in ordinary amounts of time. By being a sort of supermassively
parallel Most mutations, Penrose sees, are either invisible to selection or
fatal; only a computer, it could do Vastly many things "at once," and this
could render very few improve things. That is true, but it is just as true of
the evolutionary feasible whole classes of algorithms that otherwise were
unfeasible—such as processes that produced the mandibles of crabs as it is
of those that produced the algorithm for perfect chess. This is not what
Penrose is seeking, however, the mental states of mathematicians. Penrose's
conviction that there are these for such computers, even if they are possible,
would still be Turing machines,

"serious difficulties" is undercut, as Poe's conviction was, by the brute and
hence capable of computing only the officially computable functions—

historical fact that genetic algorithms and their kin are daily Overcoming
the algorithms (Penrose 1989, p. 402 ). They would hence fall under the
these fearsome odds and improving themselves by, well, leaps and bounds
limitations discovered by Godel. Penrose is holding out for a phenomenon
(on the geological time scale).

that is truly noncomputable, not just impractical to compute.

If our brains were equipped with algorithms, Penrose argues, natural
Present-day physics (including present-day quantum physics) is all com-
selection would have to have designed those algorithms, but: putable,
Penrose acknowledges, but he thinks that we might have to revolutionize
physics, incorporating an explicitly noncomputable theory of The 'robust'
specifications are the ideas that underlie the algorithms. But

"quantum gravity." Why does he think such a theory (which neither he nor
ideas are things that, as far as we know, need conscious minds for their
anyone else has yet formulated ) would have to be noncomputable? Because
manifestations. [Penrose 1989, p. 415]

otherwise AI is possible, and he thinks he has already shown, via his
argument from Godel's Theorem, that AI is not possible. That's all. Penrose
In other words, the designing process would have to appreciate, somehow,
candidly admits that none of his reasons for believing in the noncomput-the
rationale of those algorithms it was designing, and doesn't that take a ability
of quantum-gravity theory are drawn from quantum physics itself; the
conscious mind? Could there be reasons recognized without some
conscious mind's recognizing them? Yes, says Darwin, there could be.
Natural only reason he has for thinking that a theory of quantum gravity
would be selection is the blind watchmaker, the unconscious watchmaker,
but still a noncomputable is that otherwise AI would be possible after all. In
other discoverer of forced moves and other Good Tricks. This is not as
incon-words, Penrose has a hunch that someday we're going to find a
skyhook. This ceivable as many have taken it to be.

is the hunch of a brilliant scientist, but he himself admits that it is only a
hunch.

To my way of thinking, there is still something mysterious about evolution,
In a review of the physicist Steven Weinberg's recent book, Dreams of a
with its apparent 'groping' towards some future purpose. Things at least 448
THE EMPEROR'S NEW MIND, AND OTHER FABLES

The Phantom Quantum-Gravity Computer 449

seem to organize themselves somewhat better than they 'ought' to, just on
reliable shortcuts to verdicts about projects. If someone were to go to the
the basis of blind-chance evolution and natural selection. It may well be
Swedish government with a plan to build a perpetual-motion machine (at
that such appearances are quite deceptive. There seems to be something
government expense), Hansson would unhesitating testify, as a physicist,
about die way that die laws of physics work, which allows natural selection
that this would be—would have to be—a waste of government money. It to
be a much more effective process than it would be with just arbitrary could
not succeed, because physics has proven that a perpetual machine is laws.
[Penrose 1989, p. 416.]

flat impossible. Did Penrose think that he had offered a similar sort of
proof?

If some AI entrepreneur were to go to the government asking for money to
There could not be a clearer, more heartfelt expression of the hope for build
a mathematical-truth-detecting machine, would Penrose be similarly
skyhooks than this. And though we cannot yet rule out "in principle" the
willing to testify that such money would be wasted?

existence of a quantum-gravity skyhook, Penrose has not yet given us any
To make the question more specific, consider some rather special varieties
reason to believe in one. If his theory of quantum gravity were already a of
mathematical truth. It is well known that there can be no all-purpose reality,
it could well turn out to be a crane, but he hasn't got that far yet, and I
program that can examine any other program and tell whether or not it has
doubt that he ever will. At least he's trying, however. He wants his theory to

an infinite loop in it, and hence will not stop if started. This is known as the
provide a unified, scientific picture of how the mind works, not an excuse
for Halting Problem, and there is a Gödel-style proof that it is insoluble. (
This declaring the mind to be an impenetrable Ultimate Source of Meaning.
My is one of the theorems Turing alluded to in his 1946 comment quoted at
the own opinion is that the path he is now exploring—in particular, the
possible beginning of the chapter.) No program that is itself guaranteed to
terminate quantum effects occurring in the microtubules of the cytoskeleton
of can tell of every (finite) program whether or not it will terminate. But it
neurons, an idea enthusiastically promoted in Abisko by Stuart Hamer-off
—

might still be handy—worth some serious money—to have a program is a
nonstarter, but that is not a topic for this occasion. (I can't resist raising
around that was very, very good (if not perfect) at this task. Another class of
one question for Penrose to ponder: if the magnificent quantum property
interesting problems are known as Diophantine Equations, and it is known
lurks in the microtubules, does that mean that cockroaches have that there is
no algorithm guaranteed to solve all such equations. If our lives
noncomputable minds, too? They have the same kind of microtubules we
depended on it, should we spend a nickel on a program for solving
Diophan-have.)

tine Equations "in general" or for checking for halting "in general"? (Re-If a
Penrose-style quantum-gravity brain were truly capable of nonalgo-
member: we shouldn't spend a nickel on perpetual-motion machines, even
to rithmic activity, and if we have such brains, and if our brains are
themselves save our lives, since it will be money wasted on an impossible
task.) Penrose's answer was illuminating: if the candidates for truth-
checking the products of an algorithmic evolutionary process, a curious
inconsistency

"just somehow bubble up out of the ground," then we would be wise to
spend emerges: an algorithmic process ( natural selection in its various
levels and the money, but if some intelligent agent is the source of the
candidates and incarnations) creates a nonalgorithmic subprocess or
subroutine, turning the gets to examine the program in our truth-checker,

then it can foil our whole process (evolution up to and including human
mathematician brains) algorithmic truth-checker by constructing just the
"wrong" candidate or into a nonalgorithmic process after all. This would be
a cascade of cranes candidates—an equation unsolvable by it, or a program
whose termination creating, eventually, a real skyhook! No wonder Penrose
has his doubts prospects will confound it. To make the distinction vivid, we
can imagine about the algorithmic nature of natural selection. If it were,
truly, just an that a space pirate, Rumpelstiltskin by name, is holding the
planet hostage, algorithmic process at all levels, all its products should be
algorithmic as but will release us unharmed if we can answer a thousand
true-false well. So far as I can see, this isn't an inescapable formal
contradiction; questions about sentences of arithmetic. Should we put a
human mathema-Penrose could just shrug and propose that the universe
contains these basic tician on the witness stand, or a computer truth-checker
devised by the best nuggets of nonalgorithmic power, not themselves
created by natural selection programmers? According to Penrose, if we
hang our fate on the computer in any of its guises, but incorporatable by
algorithmic devices as found and let Rumpelstiltskin see the computer's
program, he can devise an objects whenever they are encountered (like the
oracles on the toadstools).

Achilles'-heel proposition that will foil our machine. (This would be true
Those would be truly nonreducible skyhooks.

independendy of Godel's Theorem, if our program was a heuristic truth-The
position is, I guess, possible, but Penrose must face an embarrassing
checker, taking risks like any chess program.) But Penrose has given us no
shortage of evidence for it. The physicist Hans Hansson came up with a
good reason to believe that this isn't just as true of any human
mathematicians we challenge in Abisko, comparing a perpetual-motion
machine to a truth-might put on the witness stand. None of us is perfect,
and even a team of detecting computer. Different sciences, Hansson noted,
can offer different 450 THE EMPEROR'S NEW MIND, AND OTHER
FABLES

The Phantom Quantum-Gravity Computer 451

experts no doubt has some weaknesses that Rumpelstiltskin could exploit,
fine actuality is still accessible to us, thanks to the R-and-D work of all our
given enough information about their brains. Von Neumann and Morgen-
predecessors! We might as well make the most of what we have, thereby
stern invented game theory to deal with the particular class of complicated
leaving rather more for our descendants to work with.

problems that life throws at us when there are other agents around to
compete It is time to turn the burden of proof around, the way Darwin did
when he with us. You are always wise to shield your brain from such
competitors, challenged his critics to describe some other way—other than
natural whether you are a human being or a computer. The reason a
competitive selection__ in which all the wonders of nature could have
arisen. Those who agent makes a difference in this instance is that the space
of all mathematical think the human mind is nonalgorithmic should
consider the hubris pre-truths is Vast, the space of Diophantine Equation
solutions is a Vast but suopposed by that conviction. If Darwin's dangerous
idea is right, an algo-Vanishing subspace within it, and the odds of hitting
upon a truth at random rithmic process is powerful enough to design a
nightingale and a tree.

that would "break" or "beat" our machine is truly negligible, whereas an
Should it be that much harder for an algorithmic process to write an ode to a
intelligent search through that space, guided by knowledge of the particular
nightingale or a poem as lovely as a tree? Surely Orgel's Second Rule is
style of the opponent and its limitations, would be likely to find the needle
in correct: Evolution is cleverer than you are.

the haystack: a crushing countermove.

Rolf Wasen raised another interesting point in Abisko. The class of
interesting algorithms no doubt includes many that are not humanly
accessible.

CHAPTER 15: Gödel's Theorem does not cast doubt on the possibility of AI
To put it dramatically, there are programs out there in the Library of
Toshiba after all- In fact, once we appreciate how an algorithmic process
can escape that would not just run on my Toshiba, but be valued by me for

the won the clutches of Gödel's Theorem, we see more clearly than ever
how Design derful work they would do for me, but that no human
programmers, or any of Space is uniSed by Darwin's dangerous idea.

their artifacts (program-writing programs already exist), will ever be able to
create! How can this be? None of these wonderful programs is more than a
CHAPTER 16: What, then, about morality? Did morality evolve, too?
Socio-megabyte long, and there are plenty of actual programs much bigger
than biologists from Thomas Hobbes to the present have offered Just So
Stories that already. Once again, we must remind ourselves just how Vast
the space about the evolution of morality, but, according to some
philosophers, any of such possible programs is. Like the space of possible
five-hundred-page such attempt commits the "naturalistic fallacy": the
mistake of looking to novels, or fifty-minute symphonies, or five-thousand-
line poems, the space Acts about the way the world is in order to ground—
or reduce— ethical of megabyte-long programs will only ever get occupied
by the slenderest conclusions about how tilings ought to be. This "fallacy"
is better seen as a charge of greedy reductionism, a charge which is often
justified. But then we threads of actuality, no matter how hard we work.

shall just have to be less greedy in our reductionism.

There are short novels nobody could write that would not just be best-
sellers; they would be instantly recognized as classics. The keystrokes
required to type them are all available on any word-processor, and the total
number of keystrokes in any such book is trivial, but they still lie beyond
the horizon of human creativity. Each particular creator, each novelist or
composer or computer programmer, is sped along through Design Space by
a particular idiosyncratic set of habits known as a style ( Hofstadter 1985,
sec.

Ill). It is style that both constrains and enables us, giving a positive direction
to our explorations but only by rendering otherwise neighboring regions off
limits to us—and if off limits to us in particular, then probably off limits to
everyone forever. Individual styles are truly unique, the product of untold
billions of serendipitous encounters over the ages, encounters that produced
first a unique genome, and then a unique upbringing, and finally a unique
set of life experiences. Proust never got a chance to write any novels about

the Vietnam War, and no one else could ever write them—the novels
recounting that epoch in his manner. We are stuck, by our actuality and
finitude, in a negligible corner of the total space of possibilities, but what a

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

On the Origin of Morality

1. E PLURIBUS UNUM?

Nature (the Art whereby God hath made and governes the World) is by the
Art of man, as in many other things, so in this also imitated, that it can
make an Artificial Animal. For seeing life is but a motion of Limbs, the
begining whereof is in some principall part within; why may we not say,
that all Automata (Engines that move themselves by springs and wheeles as
doth a watch) have an artificial life? For what is the Heart, but a Spring;
and the Nerves, but so many Strings; and the Joynts, but so many Wheeles
giving motion to the whole Body, such as was intended by the Artificer? Art
goes yet further, imitating that Rationall and most excellent worke of
Nature, Man. For by Art is created that great LEVIATHAN called a
COMMON-WEALTH or STATE (in Latine CIVITAS) which is but an
Artificiall Man; though of greater stature and strength than the Natural!,
for whose protection and defence it was intended; and in which, the
Soveraignty is an Artificiall Soul, as giving life and motion to the whole
body.

—THOMAS HOBBES 1651, p. 1

Thomas Hobbes was the first sociobiologist, two hundred years before
Darwin. As the opening words of his masterpiece make clear, he saw the
creation of the state as fundamentally a matter of one artifact's making
another, a sort of group-survival vehicle, "intended" for the "protection and
defence" of its occupants. The frontispiece of the original edition shows
how seriously he took his own metaphor. Why, though, do I call Hobbes a
sociobiologist? He couldn't have wanted exploit Darwin's ideas in an
analysis of society, like today's sociobiolo-gists. But he did see, clearly and
confidently, the fundamental Darwinian task: he saw that there had to be a
story to be told about how the state first

454 ON THE ORIGIN OF MORALITY

E Pluribits Unum? 455

came to be created, and how it brought with it something altogether new on
the in due course, their descendants created multicellular societies of a very
face of the Earth: morality. It would be a story taking us from a time in
which peculiar sort, known (until recently) as Men, capable of creating
Letters (or there clearly was no right and wrong, just amoral competition, to
a time in representations), which they fell to exchanging promiscuously;
this made which there manifestly was right and wrong (in some parts of the
biosphere) possible a second revolution.

via a process that gradually introduced the "essential" features of an ethical
How Hobbes would have admired Richard Dawkins' story of the birth of
perspective. Since the relevant period was prehistoric, and since he had no
memes, and the creation thereby of persons, who were not mere survival
fossil record to consult, his story would have to be a rational reconstruction,
a vehicles for their genes! These tales, composed long after his, narrate
major Just So Story of sorts (to commit a further anachronism). Once upon
a time, he steps in evolution that antedate the step he decided to describe:
the step from said, there was no morality at all. There was life; there were
human beings, persons without morality to citizens. He saw this, correctly,
as a major step and they even had language, so they had memes (to commit
a third in the history of life on this planet, and he set out to tell the tale, as
best he anachronism ). We can presume that they had words— and hence
memes—for could, of the conditions under which this step could be taken
and, once good and bad, but not ethical good and bad. "The notions of
Right and Wrong, taken, evolutionarily enforced (to use one more
anachronism). Though it was Justice and Injustice have there no place." So,
although they distinguished a not a saltation but a small step, it had
momentous consequences, for it was good spear from a bad spear, a good
supper from a bad supper, a good hunter the birth of a hopeful monster
indeed.

(an expert killer of supper ) from a bad hunter (who scared away the prey),
It would be a mistake to read Hobbes as a would-be historian who was they
had no concept of a good or just person, a moral person, or a good act, a
simply speculating irresponsibly. He surely knew that there was no hope of
moral act—or their contraries, villains and vices. They could appreciate that
finding the birthplace of civilization with the tools of history (or archeol-

some people were more dangerous than others, or better fighters, or more
ogy—a discipline not yet invented ), but that was not his point. No doubt
the desirable mates, but their perspective went no farther than that. They
had no actual prehistoric sequence of events was more muddled, and
distributed, with elements of quasi-society (of the sort we see among herds
of ungulates concept of right or wrong because "They are Qualities, that
relate to men in and packs of predators), quasi language (of the sort we see
among alarm-Society, not in Solitude." Hobbes called this epoch in our
prehistory "the state calling birds and monkeys, and even among foraging
bees ), and perhaps of nature," because it resembled in its most important
features the plight of all even elements of quasi-morality (of the sort
reputedly evidenced by the other animals in the wild, to this day. In the state
of nature, "there is no monkeys,1 as well as solicitous whales and dolphins).
Hobbes' rational replace for Industry; because the fruit thereof is uncertain;
... no Arts; no Letters, construction was a huge oversimplification, a model
intended to illustrate the no Society; and which is worst of all, continuall
feare, and danger of violent essentials while ignoring the grubby and
unknowable details. And, without death; And the life of man, solitary,
poore, nasty, brutish, and short." And any doubt, it was too simple even in
its own terms. Today, in the wake of then, one fine day, a mutation
happened to arise. One day, when yet another hundreds of investigations
into the nooks and crannies of game theory, conflict arose, just like all the
others that had come before it, something new Prisoner's Dilemma
tournaments, and the like, we know that Hobbes was happened to happen.
Instead of persisting in the myopically selfish policies of altogether too
sanguine (to use a word from his vocabulary) about the mutual defection
and distrust that had reigned heretofore, these particular conditions under
which a social contract would be evolutionarily enforce-lucky competitors
hit upon a new idea: cooperation for mutual benefit. They able. But he was
the pioneer explorer of this phenomenon.

formed a "social contract." Whereas before there had been families, or
herds, Following in his footsteps, Jean-Jacques Rousseau and various
English or tribes, this was the birth of a different kind of group, a society.
This was the thinkers, includingjohn Locke, offered their own rational
reconstructions of birth of civilization. And the rest, as one says, is history.

the birth of society. More intricate "contractarian" Just So Stories have been
How Hobbes would have admired Lynn Margulis' story of the eukaryotic
exploited in recent years. The most famous, and most sophisticated, is John
revolution, and the creation, thereby, of multicellular life! Whereas before
Rawls' Theory of Justice (1971), but there are others. They all agree in
seeing there had been nothing but boring prokaryotes, drifting through their
nasty, morality to be, in one way or another, an emergent product of a major
brutish, short lives, now there could be multicellular organisms, which,
innovation in perspective that has been achieved by just one species, Homo
thanks to a division of labor among a gang of specialist cells, could engage
in sapiens, taking advantage of its unique extra medium of information
Industry (oxygen-fired metabolism, in particular) and Arts (long-range
perception and locomotion, and protective coloration, and so forth). And, 1.
Wechkin ct al. 1964, Masserman et al. 1964; for discussion, see Rachels
1991.

456 ON THE ORIGIN OF MORALITY

E Pluribus Unum? 457

transfer, language. In Rawls' thought experiment about how a society ought
that, however it came about, the birth of morality was a good thing for us,
to be formed, we are to imagine a time, at the birth of society, when its but
we should try not to indulge in that sort of reflection. No matter how true
inhabitants gather to consider what sort of design their society shall have.

it may be, it cannot explain how these practices, for which we are They are
to reason together about this until they achieve what Rawls calls
retrospectively so grateful, came into existence and persisted. Group ratio-

"reflective equilibrium"—a stable agreement that cannot be upset by further
nality may not be assumed, any more than we may assume that since we
consideration. In this regard, Rawls' idea is like Maynard Smith's idea of an
have benefited mightily from the eukaryotic revolution, it is thereby ex-
evolutionarily stable strategy or ESS, but with a major difference: these are
plained. Group rationality, or cooperation, has to be achieved, and that is a
people doing die calculation, not birds or pine trees or other simple major
design task, whether we are considering alliances of prokaryotes or

competitors in the games of life. The key innovation in Rawls' scenario, de-
alliances of our more recent ancestors. In fact, much of the best work in
signed to ensure that undue selfishness among the participants in this exer-
ethics in recent years has concerned precisely this issue (e.g., Parfit 1984,
cise in reflection cancels itself out, is what he calls the "veil of ignorance."

Gauthier 1986, Gibbard 1985).

Everyone gets to vote on a favored design of society, but when you decide
Before looking more closely at the human predicament in this regard, we
which society you would be happy to live in and give your allegiance to,
you might consider more cautiously the metaphor that Hobbes invites us to
take vote without knowing what your particular role or niche in it will be.
You seriously, helping ourselves to the improved perspective provided by
the may be a senator or a surgeon or a street-sweeper or a soldier; you don't
get Darwinian Revolution that has intervened. In what regards is a society
like a to find out until after you have voted. Choosing from behind the veil
of ig-giant organism, and in what regards is it different?

norance ensures that people will give due consideration to the likely effects,
Multicellular organisms have solved the problem of group solidarity. One
the costs and benefits, for all the citizenry, including those worst off.

OceanofPDF.com

never hears tales of a person's thumbs rising up in civil war against the
Rawls' theory has received, and deserved, more attention than any other
neighboring fingers, or of an eagle's wings going on strike, refusing to work
work in ethics in this century, and, as usual, I am presenting an oversimpli-
unless some concession can be wrung from the beak or (more to the point)
fied version of the issues. My point is to draw attention to the placement of
the gonads. And now that we have the genes-eye perspective from which to
this work, and all the work that it has provoked and inspired, relative to
look at the world, this can strike us as something of a puzzle. Why don't
Darwinian thinking in general, and "evolutionary ethics" in particular. Note
these rebellions happen? Each cell in a multicellular organism has its own
especially that, whereas Hobbes presented a rational reconstruction of
strings of DNA, a complete set of genes for making a whole organism, and
if something that actually happened—something that must have happened
—

genes are selfish, why do the genes in the thumb cells or wing cells so
Rawls presents a thought experiment about what, if it did happen, would be
docilely cooperate with the rest of the genes? Don't the DNA copies in the
right. Rawls' project is not speculative history or prehistory, but an entirely
thumbs and wings count as genes? (Are they denied the vote? Why do they
put up with it?) As the biologist David Sloan Wilson and the philosopher of
normative project: an attempt to demonstrate how ethical questions ought to
biology Elliot Sober (Wilson and Sober 1994) have suggested, we can learn
be answered, and, more particularly, an attempt to justify a set of ethical a
lot about our social problems of defection (e.g., promising and then norms.
Hobbes hoped to solve the normative problem about what ethics reneging
on the promise) and Hardin's tragedy of the commons (see chapter ought to
be—Rawls' problem—but, greedy reductionist that he was, he tried 9) by
considering how our ancestors, going back to the first eukaryotes, to kill
two birds with one stone: he also wanted to explain how such a thing
managed to achieve "harmony and coordination of their parts." The lessons
as right and wrong came into existence in the first place, an exercise of to
be learned are tricky, however, because the cells that compose us belong
imagination in the Darwinian mode. Needless to say, life is more com-to
two very different categories.

plicated than that, but it was a nice try.

Hobbes' account in the Leviathan has a fine Panglossian ring to it—in both
An average human is normally host to billions of symbiotic organisms
exapted senses of that popular word. First, by presupposing the rationality
(or belonging to perhaps a thousand different species.... His phenotype is
not Prudence, as he called it) of the agents whose mutual solution society is
determined by his human genes alone but also by the genes of all the
supposed to be, he viewed the birth of society as dictated by reason, a
forced symbionts he happens to be infected with. The symbiont species an
indi-move, or at least strongly endorsed by reason, a Good Trick. In other
words, vidual carries usually have a very varied provenance, with only a
few being Hobbes' tale is an adaptationist Just So Story—and none the
worse for it.

likely to have come from his parents. [Delius 1991, p. 85.]

But, second, by appealing as it does to our sense of the good of our own Am
I an organism, or a community, or both? I am both—and more—but
species, it is apt to lull us into overly sanguine models of how it must have
there is a tremendous difference between the cells that are officially part of
come about—and this is a serious criticism. It may occur to us 458 ON
THE ORIGIN OF MORALITY

E Pluribus Unum? 459

my body, and the cells, many of them just as important to my survival, that
are not. The cells that compose multicellular me all share an ancestry; they
Neither sort of cell is a thinking, perceiving, rational agent, of course. And
are a single lineage, the "daughter cells" and "granddaughter cells" of the
egg neither sort is significantly more cognitive than the other. That is not
where and sperm that united to form my zygote. They are host cells; the
other cells the fulcrum of evolutionary game theory is located. Redwood
trees are not notably clever either, but they are in conditions of competition
that force are visitors, some welcome, some not. The visitors are outsiders,
because them to defect, creating what is, from their point of view (!), a
wasteful they have descended from different lineages. What difference does

this tragedy. The mutual cooperative agreement whereby they would all
forgo make?

growing tall trunks, and abandon their vain attempts to gain more than their
This is extremely easy to lose sight of, especially in contexts in which we
fair share of sunlight, is evolutionary unenforceable.

treat all these "parties" as intentional systems—as we should, but with The
condition that creates a choice is the mindless "voting" of differential
extreme caution. Unless we are careful, we are apt to miss the fact that there
reproduction. It is the opportunity for differential reproduction that lets the
are crucial moments in the careers of these various agents and semi-agents
lineages of our visitors "change their minds" or "reconsider" the choices
they and hemi-semi-demi-agents when opportunities to "decide" arise, and
then have made, by "exploring" alternative policies. My host cells,
however, have pass. The cells that compose my bulk have a shared fate, but
some in a been designed once and for all by a single vote at the time my
zygote was stronger sense than others. The DNA in my finger cells and
blood cells is in a formed. If, thanks to mutation, dominating or selfish
strategies occur to genetic cul-de-sac; in Weismann's terms (see chapter 11),
these cells are part tbem, they will not flourish ( relative to their
contemporaries ), since there is of the somatic line (the body), not the germ
line (the sex cells). Barring scant opportunity for differential reproduction.
(Cancer can be seen as a revolutions in cloning techniques (and ignoring the
strictly limited, short-selfish—and vehicle-destructive—rebellion made
possible by a revision that lived prospects they have for giving way to
replacement cells they help does permit differential reproduction.)

create), my somatic-line cells are doomed to die "childless," and since this
The philosopher and logician Brian Skyrms has recently pointed out was
determined some time ago, there is no longer any pressure, any normal
(1993, 1994a, 1994b) that the precondition for normal cooperation in the
opportunity, any "choice points," at which their intentional trajectories—or
strongly shared fate of somatic-line cells is analogous to the cooperation the
trajectories of their limited progeny—might be adjusted. They are, you
Bawls tried to engineer behind the veil of ignorance. He calls this, aptly, the
might say, ballistic intentional systems, whose highest goals and purposes

"Darwinian Veil of Ignorance." Your sex cells (sperm or ova) are formed by
have been fixed once and for all, with no chance of reconsideration or a
process unlike that of normal cell division or mitosis. Your sex cells are
guidance. They are totally committed slaves to the summum bonum of the
formed by a different process, called meiosis, which randomly constructs
body of which they form a part. They may be exploited or tricked by
visitors, half a genome-candidate (to join forces with a half from your mate)
by but under normal circumstances they cannot rebel on their own. Like the
Choosing first a bit from "column A" (the genes you got from your mother)
Stepford Wives, they have a single summum bonum designed right into
them, and then a bit from "column B" (the genes you got from your father)
until a and it is not "Look out for Number One." On the contrary, they are
team full complement of genes—but just one copy of each—is constructed
and players by their very nature.

installed in a sex cell, ready to try its fate in the great mating lottery. But
How they further this summum bonum is also designed right into them,
which "daughters" of your original zygote are destined for meiosis and
which for mitosis? This, too, is a lottery. Thanks to this mindless
mechanism, and in this regard they differ fundamentally from the other cells
that are "in paternal and maternal genes (in you) could not ordinarily "know
their fate" in the same boat": my symbiont visitors. The benign mutualists,
the neutral advance. The question of whether they are going to have germ-
line progeny commensals, and the deleterious parasites that share the
vehicle they all that might have a flood of descendants flowing on into the
future or be together compose—namely, me—each have their own summum
bonum relegated to the sterile backwaters of somatic-line slavery for the
good of the designed into them, and it is to further their own respective
lineages. For-body politic or corporation (think of the etymology ) is
unknown and tunately, there are conditions under which an entente cordiale
can be unknowable, so there is nothing to be gained by selfish competition
among maintained, for, after all, they are all in the same boat, and the
conditions their "fellow" genes.

under which they can do better by not cooperating are limited. But they do
That, at any rate, is the usual arrangement. There are special occasions,
have the "choice." It is an issue for them in a way it is not for the host cells

however, on which the Darwinian Veil of Ignorance is briefly lifted. We
have Why? What enables—or requires—the host cells to be so committed,
but already noted them; they are the cases of "meiotic drive" or "genomic
gives the visitor cells a free rein to rebel when the opportunity arises?

imprinting" (Haig and Grafen 1991, Haig 1992) we considered in chapter
460 ON THE ORIGIN OF MORALITY

Friedrich Nietzsche's Just So Stories 461

9, in which circumstances do permit a "selfish" competition between genes
2. FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE'S JUST SO STORIES

to arise—and arise it does, leading to escalating arms races. But under most
circumstances, the "time to be selfish," for genes, is strictly limited, and
once the die—or the ballot—is cast, those genes are just along for the ride
until The first impulse to publish something of my hypotheses concerning
the the next election.2

origin of morality was given me by a clear, tidy, and shrewd— also Skyrms
shows that when the individual elements of a group—whether of orecocious
— little book in which I encountered distinctly for the first whole organisms
or their parts—are closely related ( clones or near-clones) time an upside-
down and perverse species of genealogical hypothesis, the genuinely
English type, that attracted me— with that power of or are otherwise able to
engage in mutual recognition and assortative "mat-attraction which
everything contrary, everything antipodal possesses.

ing," the simple game-theory model of the Prisoner's Dilemma, in which the
strategy of defection always dominates, does not correctly model the cir-

—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 1887, preface

cumstances. That is why our somatic cells don't defect; they are clones.
This is one of the conditions under which groups—such as the group of my
"host"

It is in perfect accordance with the scheme of nature, as worked out by cells
—can have the "harmony and coordination" required to behave, quite
natural selection, that matter excreted to free the system from super-stably,
as an "organism" or "individual." But before we give three cheers and
fluous or injurious substances should be utilised for [other] highly take this
to be our model for how to make a just society, we should pause to useful
purposes.

notice that there is another way of looking at these model citizens, the

—CHARLES DARWIN 1862, p. 266

somatic-line cells and organs: their particular brand of selflessness is the
unquestioning obedience of zealots or zombies, exhibiting a fiercely
Friedrich Nietzsche published his Genealogy of Morals in 1887. He was
xenophobic group loyalty that is hardly an ideal for human emulation.

the second great sociobiologist, and, unlike Hobbes, he was inspired (or
We, unlike the cells that compose us, are not on ballistic trajectories; we
provoked) by Darwinism. As I noted in chapter 7, Nietzsche probably never
are guided missiles, capable of altering course at any point, abandoning
read Darwin. His contempt for the "English type" of genealogy was directed
goals, switching allegiances, forming cabals and then betraying them, and
so against the Social Darwinists: Herbert Spencer in particular, and
Darwin's forth. For us, it is always decision time, and because we live in a
world of fans on the continent. One fan was Nietzsche's friend Paul Ree,
whose "tidy"

memes, no consideration is alien to us, or a foregone conclusion. For this
book, Origin of the Moral Sensations (1877), provoked Nietzsche's untidy
reason, we are constantly faced with social opportunities and dilemmas of
masterpiece.3 The Social Darwinists were sociobiologists, but certainly not
the sort for which game theory provides the playing field and the rules of
great ones. In fact, their efforts almost did in the memes of their hero, by
engagement but not the solutions. Any theory of the birth of ethics is going
popularizing second-rate (per)versions of them.

to have to integrate culture with biology. As I have said before, life, for The
"survival of the fittest," Spencer proclaimed, is not just Mother Na-people
in society, is more complicated.

ture's way, but ought to be our way. According to the Social Darwinists, it is

"natural" for the strong to vanquish the weak, and for the rich to exploit the
poor. This is simply bad thinking, and Hobbes has already shown us why. It
is equally "natural" to die young and illiterate, without benefit of eyeglasses
for myopia, or medicine for illness—for that is how it was in the state of 2.
The parallel was perhaps first noted by E. G. Leigh: "It is as if we had to do
with a nature—but surely this counts for nothing when we ask: Ought it,
then, be parliament of genes: each acts in its own self-interest, but if its acts
hurt the others, they that way now? Alternatively, since it was (in an
extended sense ) entirely will combine together to suppress it. The
transmission rules of meiosis evolve as increas-natural—it wasn't
supernatural—for us to step out of the state of nature and ingly inviolable
rules of fair play, a constitution designed to protect the parliament against
the harmful acts of one or a few. However, at loci so closely linked to a
distorter that the adopt a host of societal practices for our mutual benefit,
we may simply deny benefits of 'riding its coattails' outweigh the damage of
its disease, selection tends to that there is anything universally natural about
the strong dominating enhance the distortion effect. Thus a species must
have many chromosomes if, when a distorter arises, selection at most loci is
to favor its suppression. Just as too small a parliament may be perverted by
the cabals of a few, a species with only one, tightly linked chromosome is
an easy prey to distorters" (Leigh 1971, p. 249). See also Buss 1987, pP-3.
Ree was Nietzsche's dearest friend, close enough to be entrusted with the
task of 180ff., for a discussion of germ-line sequestration as basically a
political innovation that conveying Nietzsche's proposal of marriage to Lou
Salome in 1882, but she refused, and t permitted multicellular life.

Ree fell in love with her. Life is complicated.

462 ON THE ORIGIN OF MORALITY

Friedrich Nietzsche's Just So Stories 463

the weak, and the rest of the Social Darwinist nonsense. It is amusing to
note struck Nietzsche was that this capacity does not come for free. This
was the that the fundamental (bad) argument of the Social Darwinists is
identical to a topic of the Second Essay of the three that make up the
Genealogy-. "To (bad) argument used by many religious fundamentalists.
Whereas the breed an animal with the right to make promises—is not this
the paradoxical fundamentalists sometimes begin their arguments by
saying, "If God had task that nature has set itself in the case of man? is it
not the real problem intended Man to ... [fly, wear clothes, drink
alcohol,...]," the Social Dar-regarding man?" (Second Essay, sec. 1, p. 57).
This "long story of how winists begin theirs by saying, in effect, "If Mother
Nature had intended Man responsibility originated" is a story of how early
human beings learned to to...," and even though Mother Nature (natural
selection) can be viewed as torture each other—literally—into developing a
special kind of memory, the having intentions, in the limited sense of
having retrospectively endorsed memory needed to keep track of debts and
credits. "Buying and selling, features for one reason or another, these earlier
endorsements may count for together with their psychological
appurtenances, are older even than the nothing now, since circumstances
have changed.

beginnings of any kind of social forms of organization and alliances" (Sec-
Among the Social Darwinists' ideas was a political agenda: efforts by do-
ond Essay, sec. 8, p. 70). The capacity to detect cheating, to remember the
gooders to provide nurture for the least fortunate members of society are
promise broken and punish the cheater, had to be drilled into our ancestors'

counterproductive; such efforts permit those to replicate whom nature
would brains, Nietzsche surmised: "Its beginnings were, like the beginnings
of wisely cull. These are abominable ideas, but they were not the primary
target everything great on earth, soaked in blood thoroughly and for a long
time"

of Nietzsche's criticism. His primary target was the historical naivete of the
(Second Essay, sec. 6, p. 65 ). What is Nietzsche's evidence for all this? An
Social Darwinists (Hoy 1986), their Panglossian optimism about the ready
imaginative—not to say unbridled—reading of what we might call the

fossil adaptability of human reason (or Prudence) to Morality. Nietzsche
saw their record of human culture, in the form of ancient myths, surviving
religious complacency as part of their heritage as "English psychologists"—

practices, archeological clues, and so forth. Leaving the gory details aside,
intellectual descendants of Hume. He noted their desire to avoid skyhooks:
fascinating though they are, Nietzsche's suggestion is that eventually—
perhaps via an instance of the Baldwin Effect!—our ancestors "bred" an
animal with an innate capacity to keep a promise, and a concomitant talent
for These English psychologists—what do they really want? One always
dis-detecting and punishing a promise-breaker.

covers them ... seeking the truly effective and directing agent, that which
This permitted the formation of early societies, according to Nietzsche, but
has been decisive in its evolution, in just that place where the intellectual
there was still no morality—not in the sense that we recognize and honor
pride of man would least desire to find it (in the vis inertiae of habit, for
today. The second transition occurred in historical times, he claimed, and
can example, or in forgetfulness, or in a blind and chance mechanistic
hooking-be traced via etymological reconstruction and a proper reading of
the texts of together of ideas, or in something purely passive, automatic,
reflexive, the last two millennia—an adaptation by Nietzsche of the
philological molecular, and thoroughly stupid)—what is it really that
always drives methods that he had been trained to use. To read these clues
in a new way, these psychologists in just this direction? Is it a secret,
malicious, vulgar, you need a theory, of course, and Nietzsche had one,
developed in opposition perhaps self-deceiving instinct for belittling man?
[Nietzsche 1887, First to the tacit theory he discerned in the Social
Darwinists. The proto-citizens of Essay, sec. 1, p. 24.]

Nietzsche's second Just So Story (told in the First Essay) live in societies of
sorts, not Hobbes' state of nature, but the life he describes in them is about
Nietzsche's antidote to the banalities of the "English psychologists" was a
equally nasty and brutish. Might made right—or, rather, might ruled. The
very "continental" romanticism. They thought the passage from the state of
people had concepts of good and bad, but not good and evil, right and
wrong.

nature to morality was easy, or at least quite presentable, but that was Like
Hobbes, Nietzsche tried to tell the tale of how these latter memes arose.

because they just made up their stories and didn't bother looking at the clues
One of the most daring (and ultimately least persuasive ) of his speculations
of history, which told a darker tale.

is that the memes for ( moral) good and evil Were not just minor Nietzsche
began, as Hobbes had done, by imagining a premoral world of permutations
of their amoral predecessors; the memes traded places. What human life,
but he divided his story of transition into two phases (and told had been
good ( old-style ) became evil ( new-style ), and what had been bad his tales
in reverse order, starting in the middle, something that confuses (old-style)
became (morally) good (new-style). This "transvaluation of many readers).
Hobbes had noted (1651, pt. I, ch. 14) that the very existence values" was,
for Nietzsche, the key event in the birth of ethics, and he of any practice of
forming contracts or compacts depends on the capacity of explicitly
opposed it to Herbert Spencer's bland supposition that human beings to
make promises about the future, and what 464 ON THE ORIGIN OF
MORALITY

Friedrich Nietzsche's Just So Stories 465

the concept "good" is essentially identical with the concept "useful," "prac-

(Political correctness, in the extreme versions worthy of the name, is tical,"
so that in the judgments "good" and "bad" mankind has summed up
antithetical to almost all surprising advances in thought. We might call it
and sanctioned precisely its unforgotten and unforgettable experiences
eumemics , since it is, like the extreme eugenics of the Social Darwinists,
an regarding what is useful-practical and what is harmful-impractical.
Accord-attempt to impose myopically derived standards of safety and
goodness on ing to this theory, that which has always proved itself useful is
good; the bounty of nature. Few today—but there are a few—would brand
all therefore it may claim to be "valuable in the highest degree," "valuable
in genetic counseling, all genetic policies, with the condemnatory title of
itself." This road to an explanation is, as aforesaid, also a wrong one, but at

eugenics. We should reserve diat term of criticism for the greedy and least
die explanation is in itself reasonable and psychologically tenable.

pereptory policies, the extremist policies. In chapter 18, we will consider

[First Essay, sec. 3, p. 27.]

how we might wisely patrol the memosphere, and what we might do to
protect ourselves from the truly dangerous ideas, but we should keep the
The amazing and ingenious tale Nietzsche told about how the
transvaluation of values happened defies fair summary, and is often
outrageously bad example of eugenics firmly in mind when we do so.)
misrepresented. I will not attempt to do justice to it here, but will just draw
Nietzsche's most important contribution to sociobiology, I think, is his
attention to its central dieme (widiout judging its truth): the "aristocrats"
who steadfast application of one of Darwin's own fundamental insights to
the ruled by might over the weak were cunningly tricked ( by the "priests" )
into realm of cultural evolution. This is the insight most notoriously
overlooked adopting the inverted values, and this "slave revolt in morality"
turned the by the Social Darwinists and by some contemporary
sociobiologists. Their cruelty of the strong against itself, so that the strong
were manipulated into error is sometimes called the "genetic fallacy" (e.g.,
Hoy 1986): the mistake subduing and civilizing themselves.

of inferring current function or meaning from ancestral function or
meaning.

As Darwin (1862, p. 284 ) put it, "Thus throughout nature almost every part
For with the priests everything becomes more dangerous, not only cures of
each living thing has probably served, in a slightly modified condition, for
and remedies, but also arrogance, revenge, acuteness, profligacy, love, lust
diverse purposes, and has acted in the living machinery of many ancient and
to rule, virtue, disease—but it is only fair to add that it was on the soil of
distinct specific forms." And as Nietzsche put it: diis essentially dangerous
form of human existence, the priesdy form, that man first became an
interesting animal, that only here did the human soul

... the cause of the origin of a thing and its eventual utility, its actual in a
higher sense acquire depth and become evil—and these are die two
employment and place in a system of purposes, lie worlds apart; whatever
basic respects in which man has hitherto been superior to other beasts!

exists, having somehow come into being, is again and again reinterpreted

[First Essay, sec. 6, p. 33.]

to new ends, taken over, transformed, and redirected by some power
superior to it; all events in the organic world are a subduing, a becoming
Nietzsche's Just So Stories are terrific (old-style and new-style). They are
master, and all subduing and becoming master involves a fresh interpre-a
mixture of brilliant and crazy, sublime and ignoble, devastatingly acute
tation, an adaptation through which any previous "meaning" and "pur-
history and untrammeled fantasy. If Darwin's imagination was to some de-
pose" are necessarily obscured or even obliterated. [Second Essay, sec. 12,
gree handicapped by his English mercantile heritage, Nietzsche's was even
P. 77.]

more handicapped by his German intellectual heritage, but those
biographical facts (whatever they are) have no bearing on the current value
of the Aside from Nietzsche's characteristic huffing and puffing about some
power memes whose birth each attended so brilliantly. Both came up with
dan-subduing and becoming master, this is pure Darwin. Or, as Gould might
put gerous ideas—if I am right, diis is no coincidence—but, whereas
Darwin it, all adaptations are exaptations, in cultural evolution as well as in
biolog-was ultra-cautious in his expression, Nietzsche indulged in prose so
over-ical evolution. Nietzsche went on to emphasize another classical
Darwinian heated that it no doubt serves him right that his legion of
devotees has theme:

included a disreputable gaggle of unspeakable and uncomprehending Nazis
and other such fans whose perversions of his memes make Spencer's per-
The "evolution" of a thing, a custom, an organ is thus by no means its
versions of Darwin's seem almost innocent. In both cases, we must work to
progressus toward a goal, even less a logical progressus by the shortest
repair the damage such descendants have inflicted on our meme filters,

route and witii die smallest expenditure of force—but a succession of which
tend to dismiss memes on the basis of guilt by association. Neither more or
less profound, more or less mutually independent processes of Darwin nor
Nietzsche was politically correct, fortunately for us.

subduing, plus the resistances they encounter, the attempts at transforma-
466 ON THE ORIGIN OF MORALITY

Sotne Varieties of Greedy Ethical Reductionism 467

tion for the purpose of defense and reaction, and the results of successful
argued that sociobiology, no matter how sophisticated it became, no matter
counteractions. [Second Essay, sec. 12, pp. 77-78. f how many cranes it
employed, could never bridge the gap between the "is"

of empirical scientific fact and the "ought" of ethics! (They say this with
Considering that Nietzsche may never have read Darwin's own work, his
impressive passion.) That is the conviction we must examine next.

appreciation of its major directions is remarkable, but he rather spoiled his
record as a sound Darwinian by lapsing, on the same page, into skyhook
hunger, announcing his "fundamental opposition to the now prevalent
instinct and taste which would rather be reconciled even to the absolute 3.
SOME VARIETIES OF GREEDY ETHICAL REDUCTIONISM

fortuitousness, even the mechanistic senselessness of all events than to the
theory that in all events a will to power is operating." Nietzsche's idea of a
One of the shibboleths of contemporary philosophy is that you can't derive
will to power is one of the stranger incarnations of skyhook hunger, and,

"ought" from "is." Attempting to do this is often called the naturalistic
fortunately, few find it attractive today. But, if we set that aside, the upshot
fallacy, taking the term from G. E. Moore's classic, Principia Ethica ( 1903
).

of Nietzsche's genealogy of morals is that we must be extremely careful not
As the philosopher Bernard Williams points out (1983, p. 556 ), there really
to read into the history we extrapolate from nature any simplistic

conclusions are several issues here. Naturalism "consists in the attempt to
lay down about value:

certain fundamental aspects of the good life for man on the basis of
considerations of human nature." Naturalism wouldn't be refuted by the
rather The question: what is the value of this or that table of values and
"morals"?

obvious fact that you can't derive any simple "ought" statement from any
should be viewed from the most divers perspectives; for the problem simple
"is" statement. Consider: does it follow logically that I ought to give

"value for what?" cannot be examined too subtly. Something, for example,
you five dollars from the fact ( and suppose it is a fact) that I said I would
that possessed obvious value in relation to the longest possible survival of
give you five dollars? Obviously not; any number of intervening excusing a
race (or to the enhancement of its power of adaptation to a particular
conditions might be cited to block this inference. Even if we were to char-
climate or to the preservation of the greatest number) would by no means
acterize my saying as promising—an ethically loaded description—no sim-
possess the same value if it were a question, for instance, of producing a ple
"ought" statement follows directly.

stronger type. The well-being of the majority and the well-being of the few
But reflections like this make scarcely a dent on naturalism as a theoretical
are opposite viewpoints of value: to consider the former a priori of higher
goal. Philosophers distinguish between finding the necessary and sufficient
value may be left to the naivete of English biologists. [Nietzsche 1887, First
conditions for various things, and the application of the distinction in this
Essay, sec. 17.]

case actually helps clarify the situation. It is one thing to deny that
collections of facts about the natural world are necessary to ground an It is
Spencer, clearly, not Darwin, whom Nietzsche is accusing of naivete ethical
conclusion, and quite another to deny that any collection of such facts about
value. Both Spencer and Ree thought they could see a straight, simple is
sufficient. According to standard doctrine, if we stay firmly planted in the
path to altruism (Hoy 1986, p. 29). We can see Nietzsche's criticism of this

realm of facts about the world as it is, we will never find any collection of
Panglossianism as a clear forerunner of George Williams' criticism of the
them, taken as axioms, from which any particular ethical conclusion can be
Panglossianism of naive group selectionism (see chapter 11). Spencer, in
our conclusively proven. You can't get there from here, any more than you
can terms, was an egregiously greedy reductionist, trying to derive "ought"
from get from any consistent set of axioms about arithmetic to all the true

"is" in a single step. But doesn't this reveal the deeper problem with all
statements of arithmetic.

sociobiology? Haven't the philosophers shown us that you can never derive
Well, so what? We may bring out the force of this rhetorical question with

"ought" from "is," no matter how many steps you take? Some have another
one, rather more pointed: If "ought" cannot be derived from "is,"

just what can "ought" be derived from? Is ethics an entirely "autonomous"

field of inquiry? Does it float, untethered to facts from any other discipline
or tradition? Do our moral intuitions arise from some inexplicable ethics 4.
It is interesting to note that Nietzsche also had a thoroughly sound and
modern idea module implanted in our brains (or our "hearts," to speak with
tradition)?

about the relationship between complexity and any notion of global
progress: "The that would be a dubious skyhook on which to hang our
deepest convictions richest and most complex forms—for the expression
'higher type' means no more than about what is right and wrong. Colin
McGinn notes:

this—perish more easily: only the lowest preserve an apparent
indestructibility"

(Nietzsche 1901, p. 684).

A

468 ON THE ORIGIN OF MORALITY

S ome Varieties of Greedy Ethical Reductionism 469

... according to Chomsky, it is plausible to see our ethical faculty as anal-
effect of heroin, Skinner assures us when he notices the problem (p. 110), is
ogous to our language faculty; we acquire ethical knowledge with very
anomalous." Hardly a convincing defense against the charge of greedy little
explicit instruction, without great intellectual labour, and the end
reductionism. He goes on and on in the book about how scientific his result
is remarkably uniform given the variety of ethical input we receive.

"design for a culture" is, and how optimally suited it is for... for what? What
The environment serves merely to trigger and specialise an innate sche-is
his characterization of the summum bonum?.

matism.... On the Chomskyan model, both science and ethics are natural
products of contingent human psychology, constrained by its specific con-
Our culture has produced the science and technology it needs to save
stitutive principles; but ethics looks to have a securer basis in our cognitive
itself- It has the wealth needed for effective action. It has, to a considerable
architecture. There is an element of luck to our possession of scientific
extent, a concern for its own future. But if it continues to take freedom and
knowledge that is absent in the case of our ethical knowledge. [McGinn
dignity, rather than its own survival, as its principal value, then it is pos-
1993, p. 30.]

sible that some other culture will make a greater contribution in the future.
[Skinner 1971, p. 181]

By contrasting our presumed innate sense of ethical knowledge with our
merely "lucky" capacity to engage in science, McGinn and Chomsky
suggest I hope you want to join me in retorting: So what? Even if Skinner
were right that there are reasons to be discovered for our possession of the
former. If (and surely he isn't) that a behaviorist regime is our best chance
of preserving there were a morality module, we would certainly want to
know what it was, our culture into the future, I hope it is clear to you that
Skinner may well how it evolved—and, most important of all, why. But,

once again, if we try to have been mistaken when he deemed "survival of
the culture" to be the peer inside, McGinn tries to close the door on our
fingers, decrying as highest goal any of us could ever imagine wanting to
further. In chapter 11,

"scientism" the attempt to provide answers to our scientific questions about
we briefly considered how mad it would be to put survival of one's own the
source of this marvelous perspective we and no other creatures have.

genes ahead of everything else. Is survival of one's own culture a clearly
From what can "ought" be derived? The most compelling answer is this:
saner item to put on the pedestal above everything else? Would it justify
ethics must be somehow based on an appreciation of human nature—on a
mass murder, for instance, or betraying all your friends? We meme-users
can sense of what a human being is or might be, and on what a human being
see other possibilities—beyond our genes, and beyond even the welfare of
might want to have or want to be. If that is naturalism, then naturalism is no
the groups (and cultures) to which we currently belong. Unlike our somatic-
fallacy. No one could seriously deny that ethics is responsive to such facts
line cells, we can conceive of more complicated raisons d'etre.

about human nature. We may just disagree about where to look for the most
What is wrong with Skinner is not that he tried to base ethics on scientific
telling facts about human nature—in novels, in religious texts, in psycho-
facts about human nature, but that his attempt was so simplistic! I suppose
logical experiments, in biological or anthropological investigations. The
pigeons might indeed fare as well as they ever could want in a Skinnerian
fallacy is not naturalism but, rather, any simple-minded attempt to rush
from Utopia, but we are really much more complicated than pigeons. The
same facts to values. In other words, the fallacy is greedy reductionism of
values defect can be seen in the attempt at ethics by another Harvard
professor, E.

to facts, rather than reductionism considered more circumspectly, as the O.
Wilson, one of the world's great entomologists and the coiner of the term
attempt to unify our world-view so that our ethical principles don't clash

"sociobiology" (1975). In his ethical treatise, On Human Nature (1978),
irrationally with the way the world is.

Wilson (pp. 196, 198) faces the problem of identifying the sum-mum bonum
Most of the debates about the naturalistic fallacy are better interpreted as or
"cardinal value," and comes up with two coequals: "In the beginning the
disagreements analogous to the skyhooks-versus-cranes debates in evolu-
new ethicists will want to ponder the cardinal value of the tionary theory.
For instance, B. F. Skinner, in my estimation the world-survival of human
genes in the form of a common pool over generations....

champion greedy reductionist of all time, wrote an ethical treatise of his I
believe that a correct application of evolutionary theory also favors diver-
own, Beyond Freedom and Dignity (1971). In it, he "committed the nat-sity
in the gene pool as a cardinal value." Then (p. 199) he adds a third, uralistic
fallacy" on every scale, from the minute to the megalomaniacal. "To
universal human rights, but suggests that it must be demythologized. A
make a value judgment by calling something good or bad is to classify it in

"rational ant" would find the ideal of human rights "biologically unsound
and terms of its reinforcing effects" ( Skinner 1971, p. 105). Let's see: that
would the very concept of individual freedom intrinsically evil."

mean that heroin is good, apparently, and taking care of elderly parents is
bad? Is this objection just nitpicking a careless definition? The reinforcing
we will accede to universal rights because power is too fluid in advanced
technological societies to circumvent this mammalian imperative; the long-
470 ON THE ORIGIN OF MORALITY

Some Varieties of Greedy Ethical Reductionism 471

term consequences of inequity will always be visibly dangerous to its the
human gene pool will succumb. There is no reason to think, however,
temporary beneficiaries. I suggest that this is the true reason for the uni-that
evolutionary biology shows us that our genes are powerful enough, and
versal rights movement and that an understanding of its raw biological
insightful enough, to keep us from making policies quite antithetical to their
causation will be more compelling in the end than any rationalization

interests. On the contrary, evolutionary thinking shows us that our genes
contrived by culture to reinforce and euphemize it. [E. Wilson 1978, p.

could hardly be smarter than the engineers who designed our imagined
199.]

survival machines (see chapter 14 ), and look how helpless they were in the
fa ce of unanticipatable collaborations with other robots! We have seen
Writing in collaboration with the philosopher of biology Michael Ruse,
examples of parasites—such as viruses—that manipulate the behavior of
Wilson declares that sociobiology has shown us that "Morality, or more
their hosts to further their interests instead of the hosts' own interests. And
strictly our belief in morality, is merely an adaptation put in place to further
we have seen examples of commensals and mutualists that join to make our
reproductive ends" (Ruse and Wilson 1985). Nonsense. Our reproductive
common cause, creating a larger beneficiary out of parts. Persons,
according ends may have been the ends that kept us in the running till we
could to the meme model we have sketched, are just such larger, higher
entities, develop culture, and they may still play a powerful—sometimes
overpow-and the policies they come to adopt, as a result of interactions
between their ering—role in our thinking, but that does not license any
conclusion at all meme-infested brains, are not at all bound to answer to the
interests of their about our current values. It does not follow from the fact
that our reprogenes alone—or their memes alone. That is our
transcendence, our capacity ductive ends were the ultimate historical source
of our present values, that to "rebel against the tyranny of the selfish
replicators," as Dawkins says, and they are the ultimate (and still principal)
beneficiary of our ethical actions. If there is nothing anti-Darwinian or
antiscientific about it.

Ruse and Wilson think otherwise, they are committing the "genetic" fallacy
The typical inability of Wilson and other sociobiologists to see their critics
Nietzsche (and Darwin) warned us about. As Nietzsche said, "the cause of
as anything but religious fanatics or scientifically illiterate mysterians is yet
the origin of a thing and its eventual utility, its actual employment and place
one more sad overswing of the pendulum. Skinner saw his critics as a
bunch in a system of purposes, lie worlds apart." Do Ruse and Wilson

commit this of Cartesian dualists and miracle-worshipers, and in his
peroration he fallacy? Consider what else they say on the subject (p. 51):
declared:

In an important sense, ethics as we understand it is an illusion fobbed off on
us by our genes to get us to cooperate ___ Furthermore, the way our To man
qua man we readily say good riddance. Only by dispossessing him biology
enforces its ends is by making us think that there is an objective can we turn
to the real causes of human behavior. Only then can we turn higher code, to
which we are all subject.

from the inferred to the observed, from the miraculous to the natural, from
the inaccessible to the manipulable. [Skinner 1971, p. 201.]

It must be true that there is an evolutionary explanation of how our memes
and genes interacted to create the policies of human cooperation that we
Wilson and many other sociobiologists have the same bad habit of seeing
enjoy in civilization—we haven't figured out all the details yet, but it must
anybody who disagrees with them as a benighted, science-fearing sky-be
true unless there are skyhooks in the offing—but this would not show that
hooker. In fact, only most of the people who disagree with them fit this the
result was for the benefit of the genes (as principal beneficiaries). Once
description! There is a minority comprising responsible critics of the ex-
memes are on the scene, they, and the persons they help create, are also
cesses of greed to which the enthusiastic exponents of any new scientific
potential beneficiaries. Hence, the truth of an evolutionary explanation
school are apt to succumb.

would not show that our allegiance to ethical principles or a "higher code"

Another eminent biologist, Richard Alexander, whose own treatment of was
an "illusion." In a famous image, Wilson puts his vision this way: ethics is
much more careful, expresses the appropriate skepticism about The genes
hold culture on a leash. The leash is very long, but inevitably Wilson's
candidates for cardinal values: "Whether or not these goals would values
will be constrained in accordance with their effects on the human all be
judged admirable by humanity, Wilson does not connect his selection gene
pool. [E. Wilson 1978, p. 167]

of them to biological principles" (Alexander 1987, p. 167). But Alexander
also underestimates the power of culture—memes—to snap Wilson's leash.

But all this means (unless it is just false) is that, in the long run, if we adopt
Like Wilson, he acknowledges the huge difference in speed between
cultural cultural practices that have disastrous effects on the human gene
pool, then and genetic evolution, and argues forcefully (pp. 10-11) that
cultural versatility makes a shambles of any attempts—like Chomsky's and
Fodor's—to 1

472 ON THE ORIGIN OF MORALITY

Some Varieties of Greedy Ethical Reductionism 473

find some "Thou Shalt Go No Farther" boundary to human cognition. He
limitions into the massively misleading idea that the summum bonum at
thinks, however, that evolutionary biology has shown that "the individual's
the source of every chain of practical reasoning is the imperative of our
self-interests can only be realized through reproduction, by creating descen-
genes. A counterexample shows why not: Larry, heartsick at being spurned
dants and assisting other relatives," and that a consequence of this is that no
by Lola, the love of his life, joins the Salvation Army in order to try to
forget one ever acts out of genuine beneficence or altruism. As he puts it:
her to put an end to his torment. It works. Years later, St. Larry the
Sublimated wins the Nobel Peace Prize for all his good deeds, and Richard

... this "greatest intellectual revolution of the century" tells us that, de-
Alexander, at the ceremony in Oslo, throws a wet blanket on the proceed-
spite our intuitions, there is not a shred of evidence to support this view ings
by reminding us that this all grew out of Larry's basic reproductive of
beneficence, and a great deal of convincing theory suggests that any urges.
So it did. So what? We make a big mistake if we think the way to such view
will eventually be judged false [Alexander 1987, p. 3].

understand the bulk of Larry's life is to try to interpret his every move as
designed, one indirect way or another, to ensure that he has grandchildren.

But, like Wilson and the Social Darwinists, he commits a subtle, attenu-The
possibility that a meme or complex of memes can redirect our ated version
of the genetic fallacy, and emphasizes the very passage (p. 23) underlying
genetic proclivities is strikingly illustrated by a four-century-in which he
does it.

long human experiment in sociobiology that has recently been vividly
drawn to the attention of evolutionary theorists by David Sloan Wilson and
Even if culture changes massively and continually across multiple gener-
Elliot Sober:

ations, even if our problems and promises arise out of the cultural process
of change, even if there are no genetic variations among humans that The
Hutterites are a fundamentalist religious sect mat originated in Europe
significantly affect their behavior, it is always true that the cumulative in
die sixteenth century and migrated to North America in the nineteenth
history of natural selection continues to influence our actions by the set
century to escape conscription. The Hutterites regard themselves as the of
genes it has provided humanity.

human equivalent of a bee colony. They practice community of goods ( no
private ownership ) and also cultivate a psychological attitude of extreme
This is indeed true, but it does not establish the point he thinks it does. As
he selflessness__Nepotism and reciprocity, the two principles that most
insists, no matter how potent cultural forces are, they always have to act on
evolutionists use to explain prosocial behavior in humans, are scorned by
the materials genetic forces have shaped for them, and will go on shaping,
the Hutterites as immoral. Giving must be without regard to relatedness and
without any expectation of return. [Wilson and Sober 1994, p. 602]

but they can just as readily redirect or exploit or subvert those genetically
endorsed designs as attenuate or combat them. Sociobiologists,
overreacting to the cultural absolutists (those crazy skyhookers) in much the
way Darwin Unlike most sects, the Hutterites have been quite successful at
propagating overreacted to the Catastrophists, like to emphasize that culture
must have their groups over the centuries, enlarging their range and
increasing their grown out of our biological inheritance. Indeed it must
have, and it is also global population, according to Wilson and Sober: "In

present-day Canada, true that we grew from fish, but our reasons aren't the
reasons of fish just Hutterites thrive in marginal farming habitat without the
benefit of modern because fish are our ancestors.

technology and almost certainly would displace the non-Hutterite popula-
The sociobiologists are also right to stress that our unique capacity to tion in
the absence of laws that restrict their expansion" (p. 605).

adopt and act on a different set of reasons does not prevent us from being
The Hutterites may be over four centuries old, but that is no time at all on
the genetic calendar, so it is not likely that any of the striking differences
inconvenienced or even tortured or betrayed by our "animal" urges. Long
between their groups and the groups the rest of us belong to are genetically
before Salome did her dance of the seven veils, it was already obvious to
transmitted. (Exchanging Hutterite infants for others would presumably not
members of our species that innate procreative urges can be made to assert
interfere noticeably with the "group fitness" of Hutterite colonies. Hutter-
themselves at the most inopportune times, just as sneezes and coughs can,
ites simply exploit, thanks to a heritage of cultural transmission, disposi-
seriously threatening the welfare of the body in which those urges are tions
that are part of the common human stock.) So the Hutterites are an asserted.
As in other species, many is the woman who has perished to save example
of how cultural evolution can create new group effects, and what is her
children, and many is the man who has gone to an early death eagerly
particularly delicious, from an evolutionist's point of view, is their method
of pursuing one perilous course or another, driven on by the faint hope of
fission:

procreation. But we must not turn this important fact about our biological
474 ON THE ORIGIN OF MORALITY

Some Varieties of Greedy Ethical Reductionism 475

Like a honey bee colony, Hutterite brotherhoods split when they attain a
gation and firmly admonished; "if he persists in his stubbornness and
refuses large size, with one half remaining at the original site and the other
half to listen even to the Church, then there is only one answer to this
situation, moving to a new site that has been preselected and prepared. In

prepa-and that is to cut him off and exclude him." A totalitarian regime
(even a ration for the split, the colony is divided into two groups that are
equal group totalitarianism) is extremely vulnerable to dissuasion, in almost
ex-with respect to number, age, sex, skills and personal compatibility. The
actly the same way an altruistic group is vulnerable to free-riders. That is
not entire colony packs its belongings and one of the lists is drawn by
lottery to say that reason is always on the side of defection. It isn't. It's
always on the on the day of the split. The similarity to the genetic rules of
meiosis could side of keeping options open, of design revision. This is
usually a good thing hardly be more complete. [Wilson and Sober 1994, p.
604.]

but not always, an important fact that has been noted by the economist
Thomas Schelling (1960), the philosopher Derek Parfit (1984), and others,
in The Darwinian Veil of Ignorance in action! But it is not enough, all by
itself, their discussions of the conditions under which it would be rational
for a to ensure group solidarity, since human beings, even those who have
lived rational agent to render himself (temporarily ) irrational. (For
instance, you their entire lives in a Hutterite community, are not ballistic
intentional may want to render yourself a poor target for extortion: if you
can somehow systems, but guided intentional systems, and guidance has to
be provided on convince the world that you are impervious to reason, the
world will not try a daily basis. Wilson and Sober quote Ehrenpreis, one of
the early leaders of to make you offers you can't refuse.)

the sect: "Again and again we see that man with his present nature finds it
There are circumstances—extreme circumstances, as Wilson and Sober
very hard to practice true community." They go on to provide further note—
when we may reasonably curtail free thinking, but the Hutterites have
quotations in which Ehrenpreis emphasizes just how explicit and energetic
to discourage free thinking all the time. They have to discourage reading the
practices of the Hutterites have to be to counteract this all-too-human
whatever books you want, and listening to whomever you want. It is only
by tendency. These declarations make it clear that one way or another,
Hutterite the most careful control of the communication channels that such
a pristine social organization is the effect of cultural practices quite
vigorously arrayed state can be preserved. That is why the organismic

solution is a nonsolution against the very features of human nature Wilson
and Sober wish to deny or to the problems of human society. The Hutterites
are thus themselves a downplay: selfishness and openness to reasoning. If
group thinking were curious example of greedy reductionism, not because
they are individually really as much a part of human nature as Wilson and
Sober would like to greedy—they are apparently just the opposite—but
because their solution to believe, Hutterite parents and elders wouldn't have
to say a thing. ( Compare the problem of ethics is so drastically
oversimplified. They are, however, an this to a case in which there truly is a
genetic predisposition in our species: even better example of the power of
memes to infect a group of mutual how often have you heard parents
cajoling their children to eat more communicators in such a way that the
whole group turns its efforts to sweets?)

ensuring the proliferation of those memes at whatever cost to themselves.5

Wilson and Sober are right to present the Hutterite ideals as the essence of
an organismic organization, but the big difference is that for people—
unlike the cells in our bodies, or the bees in a colony—there is always the
option of opting out. And that, I would think, is the last thing we want to
destroy in our 6. According to Wilson and Sober, the Hutterites have "the
highest birth rate of any social engineering. The Hutterites disagree,
apparently, and so, I gather, do known human society," but it would be a
mistake to read this as the triumph of Alexander's reproductive selfishness.
It would be a tactical mistake, for one thing: however the hosts of many
non-Western memes.5 Do you like the idea of turning many Hutterites there
are or have been, there have been many, many more Catholic ourselves and
our children into slaves to the summutn bonum of our groups?

monks and nuns, whose life histories would be manifestly hard to explain as
instances of That is the direction in which the Hutterites have always been
headed, and, individuals striving, as always, for the reproductive
championship. More tellingly, if the by Wilson and Sober's account, they
achieve impressive success, but only at point of the Hutterites example is
group reproductive prowess, birth rate is relevant only as the cost of
prohibiting the free exchange of ideas and discouraging thinking it bears on
group birth rate, and we have almost nothing to compare that rate with,

since few if any other human groups, so far as I know, behave that way.
Perhaps the Hutterites for oneself (which is to be distinguished from being
selfish ). Any stubborn have such a high individual birth rate because so
many of their children leave or are

freethinker is brought before the congre-

expelled and have to be replaced to keep the communities going. We might
consider the truly Machiavellian prospect that this is just what the selfish
genes wanted all along!

They found a meme—the Hutterite complex—that served their purposes,
and formed a 5. "To us in Asia, an individual is an ant. To you, he's a child
of God. It is an amazing cabal: the spartan Hutterite communities are really
just breeding pens which are kept quite concept." ( Lee Khan Yew, Senior
Minister of Singapore, in response to the outcry over unattractive so that
many of the young will leave, making room for more the sentence of
flogging of Michael Fay for vandalism, Boston Globe, April 29,1994, p. 8.)
476 ON THE ORIGIN OF MORALITY

Some Varieties of Greedy Ethical Reductionism 477

In the next section, we will look more closely at what sociobiology is and
bogeyperson you shouldn't concentrate all your energy on attacking sociobi-
is not, what it could and could not be, but before we leave the topic of
greedy ologists or behaviorists or academic philosophers, for they are not a
fraction ethical reductionism, we should stop to consider an ancient species
of this ill-of a percent of the influential thinkers who quietly and firmly
believe that favored meme with many subvarieties: religion. If you wanted
to give a clear ethics is not to be settled, but at best guided, by religious
doctrines. This is, example of the naturalistic fallacy, you could hardly
improve on the practice indeed, the reigning assumption of the U.S.
Congress and the courts; citing of trying to justify an ethical precept, an
"ought," by citing as your "is": the the Constitution has more standing than
citing the Bible, and so it should.

Bible says so. To this, as to Skinner and Wilson, we must say. So what?
Why Secular humanism often gets its bad name from self-styled secular hu-

should the facts—even if they are all facts—recounted in the Bible (or any
manists who are themselves greedy reductionists of one sort or another,
other holy text, I hasten to add) be supposed to provide any more
satisfactory impatient with the complexities of ancient traditions,
disrespectful of the justification for an ethical principle than the facts cited
by Darwin in Origin genuine wonders to be savored in the rich cultural
heritage of others. If they of Species? Now, if you believe that the Bible (or
some other holy text) is think that all ethical questions can be boiled down
to one definition or a few literally the word of God, and that human beings
are put here on Earth by simple definitions (if it's bad for the environment,
it's bad; if it's bad for Art, God in order to do God's bidding, so that the
Bible is a sort of user's manual it's bad; if it's bad for business, it's bad), then
they are no better ethicists than for God's tools, then you do indeed have
grounds for believing that the ethical Herbert Spencer and the Social
Darwinists. But when we make the quite precepts found in the Bible have a
special warrant that no other writings appropriate counterclaim that life is
more complicated, we must be careful could have. If, on the other hand, you
believe that the Bible, like Homer's not to turn that into an obstruction of
inquiry rather than a plea for more Odyssey, Milton's Paradise Lost, and
Melville's Moby Dick, is really a careful inquiry. Otherwise, we put
ourselves right back on the forlorn nonmiraculous product of human
culture, issuing from some one or more pendulum.

What, then, would a more careful inquiry look like? The task facing us is
human authors, then you will grant it no authority beyond tradition and still
the task that faced Hobbes and Nietzsche: somehow we have to have
whatever its arguments generate by their own cogency. This, it should be
evolved into beings that can have a conscience, as Nietzsche says (1885,
obvious, is the unchallenged view of philosophers who work in ethics
today, epigram 98), that kisses us while it hurts us. A vivid way of posing
the so uncontroversial that, if you ever tried to refute a claim in the
contemporary question is to imagine becoming an artificial selector of
altruistic people.

ethics literature by pointing out that the Bible said otherwise, you would be
like a breeder of domestic cattle, pigeons, or dogs, you could closely
observe met with surprised stares of disbelief. "That's just the naturalistic

fallacy!" the your herd, noting in a ledger which were naughty and which
nice, and, by ethicists might say. "You can't derive ought' from that sort of
'is'!" (So do not meddling in various ways, arranging for the nice ones to
have more children.

expect the philosophers to come to your defense if you claim that religion is
a In due course, you ought to be able to evolve a population of nice people
—

source of ethical wisdom that is superior in any way to science.) supposing
that a tendency to niceness could be represented somehow in the Does that
mean that religious texts are worthless as guides to ethics? Of genome. We
should not think of this as selection for an "ethics Module" that course not.
They are magnificent sources of insight into human nature, and is designed
just for giving right answers to ethical questions. Any modules into the
possibilities of ethical codes. Just as we should not be surprised to or
gadgets might have, singly or in coalition, the effect (or by-product or
discover that ancient folk medicine has a great deal to teach modern high-
bonus) of favoring the altruistic choices at decision time. After all, the tech
medicine, we should not be surprised if we find that these great religious
loyalty of dogs to human beings is apparently just such an outcome of texts
hold versions of the very best ethical systems any human culture will
unconscious selection by our forebears. God could conceivably have done
ever devise. But, like folk medicine, we should test it all carefully, and take
this for us, but suppose we want to eliminate the Middleman and explain
the nothing whatever on faith. (Or do you think it is wise to pop those
"holy"

evolution of ethics by natural selection, not artificial selection. Might there
mushrooms in your mouth just because some millennias-old tradition be
some blind, unforesightful forces, some set of natural circumstances, that
declares they help you see the future?) The view I am expressing is what is
could accomplish the same thing?

often called "secular humanism." If secular humanism is your bo-Not in one
fell swoop, so far as anybody can see, but there are devious gradual routes
by which we might have bootstrapped ourselves into genu-breeding. I am
not endorsing this claim, just pointing out that it must be dealt with if an ine

morality by a series of smallish changes. We may begin with "parental
evolutionary account is to be given of how and why Hutterite communities
have the investment" (Trivers 1972). It is uncontroversial that mutations
that yield features they do.

creatures who invest more energy and time in caring for their young can,
478 ON THE ORIGIN OF MORALITY

Some Varieties of Greedy Ethical Reductionism 479

under many but not all circumstances, evolve. ( Remember that only some
species engage in parental investment. This is not an option for species in is
subtle but not malicious; Williams turns that observation inside out: which
the young hatch after the parents have died, and the reasons why there
Mother Nature is heartless—even vicious—but boundlessly stupid. And as
should be these fundamentally different parental policies have been well so
often before, Nietzsche finds the point and gives it his special touch:
investigated.7 ) Now, once parental investment in their own offspring is

"According to nature" you want to live? O you noble Stoics, what decep-
secured for a species, how do we expand the circle (Singer 1981)? It is just
tive words these are! Imagine a being like nature, wasteful beyond mea-as
uncontroversial, thanks to Hamilton's pioneering work (1964) on "kin sure
indifferent beyond measure, without purposes and consideration, selection"
and "inclusive fitness," that the same considerations that favor without
mercy and justice, fertile and desolate and uncertain at the same sacrifices
for one's offspring also favor, to a mathematically precise degree, rime-
imagine indifference itself as a power—how could you live according
sacrifices for one's more distant relatives: offspring aiding parents, siblings
to this indifference! [Nietzsche 1885, p. 15]

helping each other, aunts helping nephews, and so forth. But, again, it is
important to remember that the conditions under which such aid is evolu-
Beyond inclusive fitness comes "reciprocal altruism" (Trivers 1971), in
tionarily enforceable are not only not universal but relatively rare.

which nonrelated or distantly related organisms—they needn't even be of
the As George Williams (1988) notes, not only is cannibalism (eating con-

same species—can form mutually beneficial arrangements of quid pro quo,
specifics, even close relatives) common, but in many species sibling-cide
the first step towards human promise-keeping. It is commonly "objected"

(we won't call it murder, since they know not what they do ) is almost the
that reciprocal altruism is ill-named, since it isn't really altruism at all, just
rule, not the exception. (For instance, when two or more eagle chicks are
enlightened self-interest of one form or another: you scratch my back and
I'll born in a single nest, the first to hatch is very likely to kill its younger
scratch yours—quite literally, in the case of the grooming arrangements that
siblings if it can, by pushing the eggs out of the nest, or even pushing the
are a favorite simple example. This "objection" misses the point that we
have hatchlings out.) When a lion acquires a new lioness who is still
nursing cubs to pass by small steps to the real McCoy, and reciprocal
altruism, ignoble (or from an earlier mating, the first order of business is to
kill those cubs, so that just a-noble) as it may be, is a useful stepping-stone
on the progression. It the lioness will more quickly come into estrus.
Chimpanzees have been requires advanced cognitive abilities—a rather
specific memory capable of known to engage in mortal combat against their
own kind, and langur-reidentifying one's debtors and creditors, and the
capacity to spot a cheat, for monkey males often kill the infants of other
males to gain reproductive instance.

access to females (Hrdy 1977)—so even our closest relatives engage in
Moving beyond the most businesslike and brutal forms of reciprocal
horrible behavior. Williams points out that, in all the mammalian species
that altruism towards a world in which genuine trust and sacrifice are
possible is have so far been carefully studied, the rate at which their
members engage in a task that has begun to be explored theoretically. The
first major step was the killing of conspecifics is several thousand times
greater than the highest Robert Axelrod's (Axelrod and Hamilton 1981,
Axelrod 1984) Prisoner's homicide rate measured in any American city.8

Dilemma tournaments, which invited all comers to submit strategies—al-
This dark message about our furry friends is often resisted, and popular
gorithms—for competing against all comers in a reiterated Prisoner's Di-
presentations of nature (in television documentaries, magazine articles, and

lemma tournament. (Among the many discussions of this topic, two of the
popular books ) often engage in self-censorship to avoid shocking the
squea-best are Dawkins 1989a, ch. 12, and Poundstone 1992.) The winning
strat-mish. Hobbes was right: life in the state of nature is nasty, brutish, and
short, egy became justly famous: Tit for Tat, which simply copies the
"opponent's"

for virtually all nonhuman species. If "doing what comes naturally" meant
previous move, cooperating in reward for past cooperation, and defecting in
doing what virtually all other animal species do, it would be hazardous to
the retaliation against any defections. Basic Tit for Tat comes in a variety of
health and well-being of us all. Einstein famously said that the dear God
subspecies. In Nice Tit for Tat, one begins by cooperating, and then just
does unto the other as the other has done unto oneself on the previous
move. As can be readily seen, two Nice Tit-for-Tatters playing opposite one
another 7. Complications abound, as usual. In some species of beetle, for
instance, the males make make out splendidly, cooperating indefinitely, but
a Nice Tit-for-Tatter who a huge investment in a food plug (with sperm
attached) that females compete for. This encounters a Nasty Tit-for-Tatter
who throws in an unprovoked defection at is a sort of parental investment,
but not the sort we are discussing here.

any point is in for a debilitating round of endless retaliatory defection (it 8.
Gould draws attention to the same striking statistic in "A Thousand Acts of
Kindness,"

serves them both right, of course, as they keep reminding themselves).

in Gould 1993d.

480 ON THE ORIGIN OF MORALITY

Sociobiology: Good and Bad, Good and Evil 481

The simple situations explored by Axelrod's initial tournament have given
required to get us here. At one extreme, it could turn out that there is an
way to much more complex and realistic scenarios. Nowak and Sigmund
impressive bottleneck; a quite improbable but crucial series of happy acci-

(1993) have found a strategy that outperforms Tit for Tat under an
important dents were required. (White's analysis offers some plausible
reasons for variety of circumstances. Kitcher (1993) examines a world of
non-believing that the conditions are really quite stringent.) At the other
extreme compulsory Prisoner's Dilemma games (if you don't fancy a
particular it might turn out that there is a rather wide "basin of attraction"
that will lead opponent, you can decline to play ). Kitcher shows, in careful
mathematical almost any cognitively sophisticated creatures, whatever their
circumstances, detail, how "discriminating altruists" (who keep a tally on
who has defected into societies with recognizable ethical codes. It will be
fascinating to see in the past) can flourish under certain—not all—
conditions, and also begins what large-scale computer simulations of these
complex social interactions to sort out the conditions under which varying
policies of forgiveness and tell us about the constraints on the evolution of
ethics. But we can already be forgetfulness can hold their own against the
ever-present prospect of a virtually certain that mutual recognition and the
capacity to communicate a resurgence of antisocial types. Particularly
fascinating in the directions promise—stressed by both Hobbes and
Nietzsche—are necessary conditions opened up by Kitcher's analysis is the
emergence of groups in which the for the evolution of morality. It is
conceivable if unlikely on present strong and the weak would tend to
segregate themselves and prefer to evidence, that whales and dolphins, or
the great apes, meet these necessary cooperate with their own sort.

conditions, but no other species come close to exhibiting the sorts of social
Could this set the stage for something like the Nietzschean transvaluation
cognition that true morality depends on. (My pessimistic hunch is that the
of values? Stranger things have happened. Stephen White (unpublished) has
main reason we haven't yet ruled out dolphins and whales as moralists of
the begun to investigate the important further complexities of the multi-
person deep is that they are so hard to study in the wild. Most of the
evidence about Prisoner's Dilemma. (This is the game that leads to the
tragedy of the the chimpanzees—some of it self-censored by researchers for
years—is that commons, creating both depleted fish stocks in our oceans
and forests of tall they are true denizens of Hobbes' state of nature, much
more nasty and trees.) As Kitcher points out, the simple scenarios are
analytically tractable—

brutish than many would like to believe.)

the equations of interaction and their expected yields can be solved directly
by mathematical calculation—but as we add more realism, and hence
complexity, the direct solution of the equations becomes unfeasible, so we
4. SOCIOBIOLOGY: GOOD AND BAD, GOOD AND EVIL

have to turn to the indirect methods of computer simulation. In such a
simulation, you just set up hundreds or thousands of imaginary individuals,
endow them with dozens or hundreds or thousands of strategies or other

... the human brain works however it works. Wishing for it to work in
properties, and let the computer do all the work of having them play thou-
some way as a shortcut to justifying some ethical principle undermines
sands or millions of games against each other, keeping track of the results.9

both the science and the ethics (for what happens to the principle if the This
is a branch of sociobiology or evolutionary ethics that no one should
scientific facts turn out to go the other way?).

deride. It directly tests the hunches, such as those of Hobbes and Nietzsche,

—STEVEN PINKER 1994, p. 427

that there are natural, evolutionarily enforceable paths to where we are
today. We may be quite sure that this is true, for here we are, but what this
Sociobiology has two faces. One looks toward the social behavior of
research promises to clarify is how much R-and-D work, of what sorts, was
nonhuman animals. The eyes are carefully focused, the lips pursed
judiciously. Utterances are made only with caution. The other face is almost
hidden behind a megaphone. With great excitement, pronouncements about
human nature blare forth.

9. If you want to know the odds of being dealt a straight flush in poker, one
way is to solve

—PHIUP KITCHER 1985b, p. 435

the equation provided by probability theory; you get a definitive answer.
Another way is to deal yourself a few billion poker hands, shuffling well
between each, and simply Another part of our inquiry into human nature, as
a naturalistic basis for counting the straight flushes and dividing by the total
number of hands dealt. That gives sound ethical thinking, would begin with
the undisputable fact that we you a very reliable estimate, but it is not
officially foolproof. The latter method is the only human beings are
products of evolution, and consider what limitations we feasible way to
study the complicated scenarios of evolutionary ethics, but, as we already
saw in the discussion (in chapter 7 ) of Conway's reactions to the ways in
which his Game are born with and what variations there are among us that
might have ethical of Life is being explored, the results of such simulations
can be misleading, and should relevance. Many people apparently think that
ethics is in deep trou-often be taken with a grain of salt.

482 ON THE ORIGIN OF MORALITY

Sociobiology: Good and Bad, Good and Evil 483

ble if it turns out that human beings aren't, as the Bible tells us, just a little
mosexuality—it might be better for us to be kept in the dark about such
below the angels. If we are not all perfectly rational, and equally rational,
and things. One should not dismiss this suggestion lightly. If you have ever
asked perfectly and equally malleable by education, and equally capable in
all other yourself whether there are facts about yourself (about your health,
your regards, then our underlying assumptions of Equality and Perfectibility
are competence, your prospects ) you would rather not know, and decided
that jeopardized. If that were true, it would be too late to save ourselves, for
we there were, you should be prepared to consider seriously the suggestion
that already know too much about human frailties and human differences to
the best—perhaps the only—way to ensure that such facts are not imposed
on sustain that vision. But there are more reasonable visions that are also
people is by prohibiting investigations likely to discover them.10 On the
other jeopardized by the discoveries of scientists (not just evolutionists).

hand, if we don't investigate these issues, we forgo important opportunities.

There is no doubt that the sorts of facts we can learn about an individual,
Society has a strong interest in keeping track of the drunk-driving arrests of
or a type or group of individuals (women, people of Asian descent, etc.),
can potential school-bus drivers and making them known to the appropriate
profoundly affect how we tend to regard them and treat them. If I learn that
decision-makers, and it has the same strong interest in discovering any
other Sam is schizophrenic, or profoundly retarded, or suffers from
dizziness and facts about its members that may enhance our lives or protect
society at large periodic blackouts, I am not going to hire Sam to drive the
school bus. When or particular members of it. This is what makes the
research decisions we we turn from specific facts about individuals to
generalizations about groups reach so critical and so likely to generate
controversy. It is not surprising that of individuals, the situation is more
complicated. What is the reasonable and sociobiological research is
conducted in an atmosphere of unremitting just response of insurance
companies to the actuarial facts about the different concern-mounting-to-
alarm, and when it escalates, as it often does, the life expectancies of men
and women? Is it fair to adjust their premiums propaganda sometimes
buries the truth.

accordingly? Or should we treat both genders alike in the premium Let's
begin with the term, "sociobiology." When E. O. Wilson coined it, he
department and accept their differential rate of receiving benefits as fair?

meant it to cover the whole spectrum of biological investigations concerned
With regard to voluntarily acquired differences (smokers versus
nonsmokers, with the evolution of interrelations between organisms in
pairs, groups, for instance), we see fairness in making the smokers pay for
their habit in herds, colonies, nations. Sociobiologists study the relations
among termites higher premiums, but what about differences people are just
born with?

in a mound, cuckoo hatchlings and their duped adoptive parents, the mem-
African-Americans are, as a group, unusually prone to high blood pressure,
bers of matriarchal groups of elephants, bands of monkeys, elephant-seal
bulls diabetes runs higher than average among Hispanics, and Whites are
more and their harems—and human couples, families, tribes, and nations.

But, as prone to skin cancer and cystic fibrosis (Diamond 1991). Should
these Kitcher says, the sociobiology of nonhuman animals has always been
con-differences be reflected in calculating their health insurance? People
whose ducted with greater care and caution. (See also Ruse 1985.) In fact, it
in-parents smoked in the home while they were growing up run a higher
risk of cludes some of the most important (and widely heralded ) advances
in recent respiratory disorders through no fault of their own. Young men, as
a group, theoretical biology, such as the classic papers of Hamilton, Trivers,
and May-are less safe drivers than young women. Which of these facts
should count nard Smith.

for how much, and why? Even when we deal with facts about particular
Hamilton could be said to have inaugurated the field with his introduction
individuals, rather than statistical trends, there are quandaries aplenty: Are
of the conceptual framework of kin selection, which solved, among other
employers—or others—entitled to know whether you have ever been
things, many of Darwin's puzzles about eusociality in insects—the way
ants, married, have a criminal record, a safe driving record, a history of
scuba-bees, and termites live "selflessly" in large colonies, most of them
sterile diving? Is there a principled difference between releasing
information on a servants to a single fertile queen. But Hamilton's theory
didn't solve all the person's grades in school and releasing information
about that same person's problems, and among Richard Alexander's
important contributions was his IQ score?

characterization of the conditions under which eusocial mammals These are
all difficult ethical problems. The citizenry is currently debating various
restrictions on what information employers, the government, the schools,
the insurance companies, and so forth may seek regarding individuals, and
it is a short step to the conclusion that we'd all be better off if 10. Philip
Kitcher opens his critical survey of sociobiology, Vaulting Ambition (
1985b), certain sorts of information were just not pursued by science at all.
If there with the unanswerable tale of the damage done by the notorious
British eleven-plus are big differences between the brains of men and
women, or if there is a examination—now abandoned, thank goodness—
which branded eleven-year-old children with an up-or-down verdict of their

promise that quite inexorably fixed the gene that predisposes for dyslexia,
or violence—or musical genius, or ho-subset of paths their lives might take.

484 ON THE ORIGIN OF MORALITY

Sociobiology: Good and Bad, Good and Evil 485

might evolve—a "prediction" stunningly confirmed by the subsequent stud-
displays, territoriality, and the like in nonhuman species should be tarred ies
of the amazing South African naked mole rats (Sherman, Jarvis, and with
the same brush as the more flagrant oversteppers in human sociobiology
Alexander 1991). This was such an astonishing triumph of adaptationist is
both a miscarriage of justice and a serious misrepresentation of science.

reasoning that it deserves to be more widely known. As Karl Sigmund But
neither "side" has done its duty. Unfortunately, the siege mentality has
describes it, Hamilton's ideas

made the best of the sociobiologists somewhat reluctant to criticize the
shoddy work of some of their colleagues. Though Maynard Smith,
Williams, led to a most remarkable discovery when, in 1976, the American
biologist Hamilton, and Dawkins can often be found in print firmly setting
aright R. D. Alexander lectured on sterile castes. It was well known that
these various innocent flaws in arguments and pointing out complications—
in existed for ants, bees, and termites, but not for any kind of vertebrate.

short, making the corrections that are the normal topics of communication
in Alexander, in a kind of thought experiment, toyed with the notion of a all
science—they have largely eschewed the deeply unpleasant task of
mammal able to evolve a sterile caste. It would, like the termites, need an
pointing out more egregious sins in the work of those who enthusiastically
expandable nest allowing for an ample food supply and providing shelter
misuse their own good work. Donald Symons (1992 ) is a bracing
exception, from predators. For reasons of size, an underbark location [like
that of the however, and there are others. I will point to just one major
source of bad presumed insect ancestors of termites] was no good. But
underground burrows replete with large tubers would fit the bill perfectly.
The climate thinking that is ubiquitous in human sociobiology, and is

seldom carefully should be tropical; the soil ( more than a hint of Sherlock
Holmes here!) addressed by sociobiologists themselves, perhaps because
Stephen Jay Gould heavy clay. An ingenious exercise in armchair ecology
altogether. But after has made the point in criticism, and they would hate to
concede that he is his lecture, Alexander was told that his hypothetical beast
did indeed live right about anything. He is right about this point, and so is
Philip Kitcher in Africa; it was the naked mole rat, a small rodent studied
by Jennifer (1985b), who develops the criticism in much more detail. Here
is Gould's Jarvis. [Sigmund 1993, p. 117.]

version, which is a little hard to understand. (At first, I didn't see how to
read it sympathetically, and had to ask Ronald Amundsen, an excellent
Naked mole rats are surpassingly ugly and strange, a thought experiment
philosopher of biology, to explain to me what Gould was getting at. He of
Mother Nature's to rival any of the fantasies of philosophy. They are
succeeded.)

genuinely eusocial. The single queen mole rat is the sole female breeder,
and she keeps the rest of the colony in line by releasing pheromones that
suppress The standard foundation of Darwinian just-so stories does not
apply to the maturation of the other females' reproductive organs. Naked
mole rats are humans. That foundation is the implication: if adaptive, then
genetic—for coprophagous—they regularly eat their own feces—and when
the the inference of adaptation is usually the only basis of a genetic story,
and grotesquely swollen pregnant queen cannot reach her own anus, she
begs Darwinism is a theory of genetic change and variation in population.

feces from her attendants. (Had enough? But there's much, much more,

[Gould 1980c, p. 259]

highly recommended to all whose curiosity exceeds their squeamish-ness.)
A bounty has been learned from the study of naked mole rats, and other
What does this mean? Gould is not saying, as he may seem at first to be
nonhuman species, using the techniques of Darwinian reverse engineering
—

saying, that adaptationist inference does not apply to humans. He is saying
using adaptationism, in other words—and there is surely more to come. E.
O.

that since in the case of humans ( and only humans ) there is always another
Wilson's own important work on social insects (1971) is deservedly world
possible source of the adaptation in question—namely culture—one cannot
famous, and there are literally hundreds of other fine animal
sociobiologists.

so readily infer that there has been genetic evolution for the trait in
question.

(See, e.g., the classic anthologies, Clutton-Brock and Harvey 1978, Barlow
Even in the case of nonhuman animals, the inference from adaptation to and
Silverberg 1980, King's College Sociobiology Group 1982.) genetic basis is
risky when the adaptation in question is not an anatomical Unfortunately,
they all work under a cloud of suspicion, raised by the feature but a
behavioral pattern which is an obviously Good Trick. For then escalation of
greedy claims by a few human sociobiologists (through their there is
another possible explanation: the general nonstupidity of the species.

megaphones, as Kitcher suggests), which is then echoed by the escalation of
As we have seen so often, the more obvious the move, the less secure the
blanket condemnations from their opponents. This really is an unfortunate
inference that it has to have been copied from predecessors—specifically
fallout, for, as in any other legitimate area of science, some of this work is
carried by the genes. Many years ago, I played my first computer "video
great, some is good, some is good but false, and some is bad— but none of
it game" at the AI Lab at

is evil. That serious students of mating systems, courtship 486 ON THE
ORIGIN OF MORALITY

Sociobiology: Good and Bad, Good and Evil 487

MIT: it was called Maze War, and more than one person could play it at
once, biologists as signs of a special "instinct," when in fact it was just their

each at a separate terminal linked to a central time-sharing computer. On the
general intelligence that led them again and again to hit upon the same
bright screen you saw a simple perspective line drawing of a maze, in
which you, idea. The problem of interpretation for Homo sapiens is
multiplied many the viewer, were situated. Corridors could be seen up
ahead leading off to left times over by the fact of cultural transmission.
Even if some individual and right, and by pressing keys on the keyboard
you could move forward and hunters are not bright enough to figure out for
themselves that they should back, or turn ninety degrees to the left or the
right. Another key on the throw the pointy end first, they will be told to do
so by their peers, or will keyboard was the trigger of your gun, which fired
straight ahead. All the just notice their practice, and will appreciate the
results immediately. In other other players were in the same virtual maze,
wandering around, looking for words, if you are not totally idiotic, you
don't need a genetic basis for any someone to shoot, and hoping not to be
shot. If one of the other players adaptation that you will pick up from your
friends in any case.

crossed your path, he would show up as a simple cartoon figure, whom you
It is hard to believe that sociobiologists can make the mistake of ignoring
would hope to shoot before it turned, saw you, and shot you. After a few
this omnipresent possibility, but the evidence is striking that they have done
minutes of frantic play, in which I was "shot" from behind several times, I
so, again and again ( Kitcher 1985 )• Many instances could be listed, but I
will found my mounting paranoia so uncomfortable that I sought relief: I
found a concentrate on a particularly visible and well-known case.
Although E. O.

cul-de-sac in the maze, backed myself into it, and just sat there, relatively
Wilson (1978, p. 35) states clearly that the human behaviors to be
accounted calmly, with my finger on the trigger. It struck me then that I had
adopted the for by specific genetic hypotheses should be the "least rational
of the human policy of a moray eel, patiently waiting in its well-protected
hole for repertoire— In other words, they should implicate innate,
biological something strike-worthy to swim by.

phenomena that are the least susceptible to mimicry by culture," he goes on
Now, does my behavior on this occasion give us any reason to suppose (pp.
107ff.) to claim, for instance, that the evidence of territoriality in all there is
a genetic predisposition to moray-eel behavior in Homo sapiens? Did
human cultures (we human beings like to call a bit of space our own) is
clear the stress of the occasion dredge up some ancient policy, lying
dormant in proof that we, like very many other species, have a genetic
predisposition my genes since the days when my ancestors were still fish?
Of course not.

wired in at birth for the defense of territory. That may be true—in fact, it
The strategy is just too obvious. It felt like a forced move, but it was at least
a would not be at all surprising, since many species manifestly do exhibit
innate Good Trick. We would not be surprised to find Martians backing
themselves territoriality, and it is hard to think of what force there might be
to remove self-protectively into Martian caves, and the likelihood that
Martians had such a disposition from our genetic makeup. But the ubiquity
of territoriality morays for ancestors would presumably not be adjusted
upwards from zero in human societies is by itself no evidence at all for this,
since territoriality by the discovery. It is true that I am distantly related to
moray eels, but the makes so much sense in so many human arrangements.
It is, if not a forced fact that I found this strategy in this environment is
surely just a matter of its move, close to it.

obvious excellence, given my needs and desires and my own assessment of
The very considerations that in other parts of the biosphere count for an my
limitations at the time. This illustrates the fundamental obstacle—not
explanation in terms of natural selection of an adaptation—manifest utility,
insuperable, but much larger than is commonly acknowledged—to
inference obvious value, undeniable reasonableness of design—count
against the need

in human sociobiology: showing that a particular type of human behavior is
for any such explanation in the case of human behavior. If a trick is that
good , ubiquitous or nearly ubiquitous in widely separated human cultures
goes no then it will be routinely rediscovered by every culture, without need
of either way at all towards showing that there is a genetic predisposition

for that genetic descent or cultural transmission of the particulars.11 We
saw in particular behavior. So far as I know, in every culture known to
chapter 12 that it is the prospect of convergent cultural evolution—

anthropologists, the hunters throw their spears pointy-end-first, but this
reinventing the wheel—that plays havoc with our attempts to turn memet-
ics obviously doesn't establish that there is a pointy-end-first gene that into
a science. The same difficulty besets all attempts to infer genetic
approaches fixation in our species.

Nonhuman species can exhibit a similar, if reduced, capacity to reinvent the
wheel, even though they lack culture. Octopuses are remarkably intel-11. A
useful exercise when considering any such case is to imagine creating a
roomful of ligent, and although they show no signs of cultural transmission,
they are roughly rational robots ( smart, but with no genetic ancestry at all)
and asking yourself if smart enough so that we should not be surprised to
discover them individ-they would soon settle into the behavior in question.
(If the case is complex, a computer ually hitting upon lots of Good Tricks
that had never been posed as specific simulation should be used, as a
prosthetic guide to your imagination.) If so, it is not so surprising that
human beings everywhere do it, too, and it probably has nothing to do
problems to their ancestors. Any such uniformity might be misread by with
their primate heritage, their mammalian heritage, even their vertebrate
heritage.

488 ON THE ORIGIN OF MORALITY

Sociobiology: Good and Bad Good and Evil 489

factors from cultural commonalities, and for the same reason. But, although
The first and the last, obviously, the same as in the first problem. Why is
one Wilson has sometimes noted this problem, at other times he forgets:
setting so much easier than the other? Perhaps, you may think, it is the
abstractness of the first, the concreteness of the second, or the familiarity of
The similarities between the early civilizations of Egypt, Mesopotamia, the
second, or the fact that the second involves a conventional rule, not a India,
China, Mexico, and Central and South America in these major fea-
regularity of nature. Literally hundreds of Wason card-sorting tests have

been tures are remarkably close. They cannot be explained away as the
products administered to subjects, in hundreds of variations, testing these
and other of chance or cultural cross-fertilization. [Wilson 1978, p. 89]

hypotheses. The performance of subjects on the tests varies widely,
depending on the details of the particular test and its circumstances, but a
We need to look at each remarkable similarity in turn, to see if any of them
survey of the results leaves no doubt at all that there are settings that are
hard needs a genetic explanation, for, in addition to cultural cross-
fertilization for almost all groups of subjects, and others that are easy for
the same (cultural descent) and chance, there is the possibility of
reinvention. There subjects. But a riddle remained, reminiscent of the riddle
of the two black may be specific genetic factors operating in many or all
these similarities, boxes: what exactly was it about the hard cases that made
them hard—or (a but, as Darwin stressed, the best evidence will always be
idiosyncrasies—

better question) what was it about the easy cases that made them easy?

quirky homologies—and no-longer-rational survivals. The most compelling
Cosmides and Tooby (e.g., Barkow, Cosmides, and Tooby 1992, ch. 2 )
came cases of this sort are currently being uncovered in the marriage of
socio-up with an evolutionary hypothesis, and it is hard to imagine this
particular biology and cognitive psychology recently going by the name of
evolutionary idea occurring to anyone who wasn't acutely aware of the
possibilities of psychology (Barkow, Cosmides, and Tooby 1992 ).
Highlighting a single case Darwinian thinking: the easy cases are all cases
that are readily interpreted as will provide a useful contrast between good
and bad uses of Darwinian tasks of patrolling a social contract, or, in other
words, cheater detection.

thinking in the study of human nature, and clarify the position on rationality
Cosmides and Tooby seem to have uncovered a fossil of our Nietzschean
(or just nonstupidity) just presented.

past! Framing the hypothesis is not yet proving it, of course, but one of the
How logical are we human beings? In some regards very logical, it seems,
important virtues of their hypothesis is that it is eminently testable, and has

and in others embarrassingly weak. In 1969, the psychologist Peter Wason
so far stood up very well to a wide variety of attempts to refute it. Suppose
it devised a simple test that bright people—college students, for instance—
do is true; would it show that we can reason only about the things Mother
rather badly on. You may try it yourself. Here are four cards, some letter-
Nature wired us to reason about? Obviously not; it just shows why it is
easier side-up, and some number-side-up. Each card has a numeral on one
side and (more "natural") for us to reason about some topics than others. We
have a letter on the other:

devised cultural artifacts (systems of formal logic, statistics, decision
theory, and so forth, taught in college courses) that expand our reasoning
powers many fold. Even the experts often neglect these specialized
techniques, however, and fall back on good old seat-of-the-pants reasoning,
sometimes with embarrassing results, as the Wason test shows.
Independently of any Your task is to see whether in this case the following
rule has any exceptions: Darwinian hypotheses, we know that, except when
people are particularly If a card has a "D" on one side, it has a "3" on the
other side. Now, which self-conscious about using these heavy-duty
reasoning techniques, they tend cards do you need to turn over in order to
discover if this is true? Sad to say, to fall into cognitive illusions. Why are
we susceptible to these illusions? The fewer than half of students in most
such experiments get the right answer.

evolutionary psychologist says: For the same reason we are susceptible to
Did you? The correct answer is much more obvious if we shift the content
optical illusions and other sensory illusions—we're built that way. Mother
(but not the structure) of the problem very slightly. You are the bouncer in a
Nature designed us to solve a certain set of problems posed by the bar, and
your job depends on not letting any underage (under twenty-one)
environments in which we evolved, and whenever a cut-rate solution
customers drink beer. The cards have information about age on one side,
and emerged—a bargain that would solve the most pressing problems pretty
well, what the patron is drinking on the other. Which cards do you need to
turn even if it lacked generality—it tended to get installed.

over?

Cosmides and Tooby call these modules "Darwinian algorithms"; they are
mechanisms just like the two-bitser, only fancier. We obviously don't get by
with just one such reasoning mechanism. Cosmides and Tooby have been
gathering evidence for other special-purpose algorithms, useful in thinking
490 ON THE ORIGIN OF MORALITY

Sociobiology: Good and Bad, Good and Evil 491

about threats and other social exchanges, and other ubiquitous problem-
This, of course, is wrong, wrong, wrong. But compare it with my Only
types: hazards, rigid objects, and contagion. Instead of having a single, cen-
Slightly Nonstandard Social Science Model:

tral general-purpose reasoning machine, we have a collection of gadgets, all
pretty good (or at least pretty good in the environments in which they
Whereas animals are rigidly controlled by their biology, human behavior is
evolved), and readily exaptable for new purposes today. Our minds are like
largely determined by culture, a largely autonomous system of symbols
Swiss-army knives, Cosmides says. Every now and then, we discover
curious and values, growing from a biological base, but growing
indefinitely away gaps in our competence, strange lapses that give us clues
about the particular from it. Able to overpower or escape biological
constraints in most regards, history of R and D that explains the machinery
that underlies the glittering cultures can vary from one another enough so
that important portions of facade of culture. This is surely the right way for
psychologists to reverse-the variance are thereby explained __ Learning is
not a general-purpose engineer die human mind, always watching out for
QWERTY phenomena.

process, but human beings have so many special-purpose gadgets, and I
consider Cosmides and Tooby to be doing some of the best work in learn to
harness them with such versatility, that learning often can be Darwinian
psychology today, which is why I chose them for my example, but treated
as if it were an entirely medium-neutral and content-neutral gift of I must
temper my recommendation with some constructive criticism. The non-
stupidity.

ferocity of the attacks they have encountered from the fans of Gould and
Chomsky is breathtaking, and, embattled as they are, they, too, tend to This
is the model I have argued for in this book; it is no defense of skyhooks;
caricature the opposition, and are sometimes too hasty in dismissing skep-it
simply acknowledges that we now have cranes of more general power than
ticism about their arguments as flowing from nothing more presentable than
the cranes of any other species.12

the defensive territoriality of old-fashioned social scientists who still haven't
There is plenty of good work in sociobiology and evolutionary psychol-got
the word about evolution. This is often, but not always, the case. Even if
ogy, and there is plenty of bad work, as in any field. Is any of it evil? Some
they are right—and I am confident that they are—that such rationality as we
of it is at least dismayingly heedless of the misuses to which it might be put
human beings have is the product of the activities of a host of special-
purpose by ideologues of one persuasion or another. But, here again, the
escalation of gadgets designed by natural selection, it does not follow that
this "Swiss-charges typically produces more heat than light. One instance
can stand in army knife" of ours cannot have been used, time and time
again, to reinvent for a survey of the whole sorry field of battle. Do ducks
rape? Sociobiol-the wheel. It still has to be shown, in other words, that any
particular ogists have uncovered a common pattern in which males in some
species—

adaptation is not a cultural product responding quite directly ( and
rationally) such as ducks—violently mate with obviously unwilling
females. They have to quite recent conditions. They know this, and they
carefully avoid the trap called it rape, and this terminology has been decried
by critics, most vig-we have just seen E. O. Wilson fall into, but in the heat
of battle they orously by the feminist biologist Anne Fausto-Sterling (1985).

sometimes forget.

She has a point. I said we wouldn't call the sibling-cide that many species
Like Darwin overlooking the innocuous possibility of sudden extinctions
engage in "murder," since they know not what they do. They kill, but do not
because he was so intent on fleeing from Catastrophism, Tooby and murder,
each other. It is impossible for one bird to murder another bird—

Cosmides, and the other evolutionary psychologists, tend to overlook the

"murder" is reserved for the intentional, deliberate, wrongful killing of one
bland possibility of the independent rediscovery of forced moves, so intent
human being by another. (You can kill a bear, but not murder it, and if it
kills are they on replacing the "Standard Social Science Model" with a
properly you, that isn't murder either.) Now, can one duck rape another?
Fausto-Darwinian model of the mind. The Standard Social Science Model
has among its precepts:

Whereas animals are rigidly controlled by their biology, human behavior is
12. Even Donald Symons ( 1992, p. 142) slips slightly, succumbing to a
luscious slogan: determined by culture, an autonomous system of symbols
and values. Free

"There is no such thing as a 'general problem solver' because there is no
such thing as a from biological constraints, cultures can vary from one
another arbitrarily general problem." Oh? There is no such thing as a
general wound either; each wound has a quite specific shape, but there can
still be a general wound-healer, capable of healing and without limit __
Learning is a general-purpose process, used in all wounds of an almost
limitless variety of shapes—simply because it is cheaper for Mother
domains of knowledge. [Pinker, 1994, p. 406; see also Tooby and Cosmides
Nature to make a (quite) general wound-healer than a specialist wound-
healer (G.

1992, pp. 24-48.]

Williams 1966, pp. 86-87; see also Sober 1981b, pp. 106 ff.). How general
any cognitive mechanism is, or can be made to be through cultural
enhancement, is always an open empirical question.

492 ON THE ORIGIN OF MORALITY

Sociobiology: Good and Bad, Good and Evil 493

Sterling, and other feminists, say No—this is to misapply a term that also
sociobiologists as supporting authorities, or so much as knew of their ex-

properly applies only to human misdeeds. If there were a common term in
istence. With equal justice she could blame the tribe of Shakespeare
scholars English that stood to "rape" as "kill" (or "homicide" or
"manslaughter") stood for such miscarriages of justice (supposing that such
they were), for these to "murder," then the use by sociobiologists of the
term "rape" for nonhuman scholars have no doubt been insufficiently
condemnatory in their writings forced copulation, instead of using the less
loaded term, would be truly over the years about Shakespeare's sometimes
tolerant portrayal of rape in outrageous. But there isn't any such term.

his plays. This is surely not the way to foster enlightened consideration of
the So is the use of the short, vivid term "rape" in place of "forced
copulation"

issues. Tempers run high, and the issues are deadly serious, which is all the
(or other such term) a serious sin? It is at least insensitive. But do the critics
more reason for scientists and philosophers to be careful not to abuse either
complain about the other terms drawn from human life in common use by
the truth or each other in the name of a worthy cause.

sociobiologists? There is sexual "cannibalism" in spiders (the females wait
What, then, would a more positive approach to a "naturalized" ethics look
till the males have finished impregnating them, and then kill and eat them),
like? I have a few preliminary suggestions to offer in the next chapter.

there are "lesbian" gulls (female couples that stay paired over several
seasons, defending territory, building a nest, sharing the task of sitting on
the eggs). There are "homosexual" worms and bird "cuckolds." At least one
CHAPTER 16: As Darwinian thinking gets closer and closer to home—
where critic, Jane Lancaster (1975), does in fact object to the word "harem"
used to we live— tempers run higher, and die rhetoric tends to swamp die
analysis.

refer to the group of females guarded and mated by a single male— such as
But sociobiologists, beginning with Hobbes and continuing through
Nietzsche an elephant seal; she recommends the term "one-male group,"
since these to die present day, have seen that only an evolutionary analysis
of the females "are virtually self-sufficient, except for fertilization" (Fausto-

Sterling origins— and transformations— of ethical norms could ever
properly make 1985, p. 181n.). It seems to me that deliberate human
cannibalism is much, sense of them. Greedy reductionists have taken their
usual first stumbling much more terrible than anything one spider could do
to another, but I for steps into this new territory, and been duly chastened by
the defenders of one don't object if an arachnologist wants to use the term.
For that matter, complexity. We can learn from these errors without turning
our backs on what about the benign terms (G. Williams 1988)? Do the
critics also object to them.

"courtship ritual" and "alarm call"—or the use of the term "mother" to refer
to a female but nonhuman parent?

CHAPTER 17: What are the implications for ethics of the fact that we are
Fausto-Sterling does note that the sociobiologists she criticizes for using

Unite, time-pressured, heuristic searchers for ethical truths? An
examination the term "rape" were careful to assert that human rape was
different from of the persistent pendulum swing between utilitarian and
Kantian ethics rape in other species. She quotes (p. 193) from Shields and
Shields 1983:

suggests some principles for redesigning ethics along more realistic, Dar-

winian lines.

Ultimately men may rape because it increases their biological fitness and
thus rape may serve, at least in part, a reproductive function, but in an
immediate proximate sense it is as likely that they rape because they are
angry or hostile, as the feminists suggest.

This passage is not the ringing denunciation of rape that Fausto-Sterling
requires—something that one might think would go without saying in the
context of a scientific article—but it does firmly dissociate human rape
from any biological "justification." That makes Fausto-Sterling's further
charge outrageous. She places responsibility on these sociobiologists for
various claims made by defense lawyers in rape cases who have got their
clients off relatively easily by noting their "unbearable physical urges" or by

describing a client's act: "as rapes go, a relatively mild rape." What do these
claims have to do with sociobiology in general, or the articles she discusses
in particular?

She offers no reason at all to believe these lawyers cited the Can Ethics Be
Naturalized? 495

rality just a matter of subjective taste ( and political power )? Are there no
discoverable and confirmable ethical truths, no forced moves or Good
Tricks? Great edifices of ethical theory have been constructed, criticized
and CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

defended, revised and extended by the best methods of rational inquiry, and
Redesigning Morality

among these artifacts of human reasoning are some of the most magnificent
creations of culture, but they do not yet command the untroubled assent of
all those who have studied them carefully.

Perhaps we can get some clues about the status and prospects for ethical
theory by reflecting on what we have seen to be the limitations of the great
design process that has ethicists among its products to date. What follows,
we may ask, from the fact that ethical decision-making, like all actual
processes of exploration in Design Space, must be to some degree myopic
and time-pressured?

Shortly after the publication of Darwin's Origin of Species, another eminent
Victorian, John Stuart Mill, published his attempt at a universal ethical 1.
CAN ETHICS BE NATURALIZED?

theory, Utilitarianism (1861). Darwin read it with interest, and responded to
the "celebrated work" in his Descent of Man (1871). Darwin was puzzled
by Thus at last mm comes to feel, through acquired and perhaps inherited
Mill's stand on whether the moral sentiment was innate or acquired, and
habit, that it is best for him to obey his more persistent impulses. The sought
the help of his son William, who advised his father that Mill was imperious
word ought seems merely to imply the consciousness of the

"rather in a muddle on the whole subject" (R. Richards 1987, p. 209n.), but,
existence of a rule of conduct, however it may have originated.

aside from a few such points of disharmony, Darwin and Mill were (cor-

—CHARLES DARWIN, Descent of Man ( 2nd ed,

rectly) seen as united in their naturalism—and duly excoriated together by
1874), p. 486

the defenders of skyhooks, most notably St. George Mivart, who declared:
Human culture, religion in particular, is a repository of ethical precepts,

... men have a consciousness of an absolute and immutable rule legiti-
ranging from the Golden Rule, the Ten Commandments, and the Greeks'

mately claiming obedience with an authority necessarily supreme and

"Know Thyself" to all manner of specific commands and prohibitions, ta-
absolute—in other words, intellectual judgments are formed which imply
boos, and rituals. Philosophers since Plato have attempted to organize these
the existence of an ethical ideal in the judging mind. [Mivart 1871, p. 79]

imperatives into a single rationally defensible and universal system of
ethics, so far without achieving anything approaching consensus.
Mathematics and To such bluster there is probably no better response than
Darwin's, quoted physics are the same for everyone everywhere, but ethics
has not yet settled at the head of this section. But there were more measured
criticisms as well, into a similar reflective equilibrium.2 Why not? Is the
goal illusory? Is mo-and one of the more frequent stuck in the craw of Mill:
"Defenders of utility often find themselves called upon to reply to such
objections as 1. Material in this chapter is drawn from Dennett 1988b,
where the issues are developed of describing the world verbally rather than
knowing it philosophically. In the recent in more detail.

past, religion had been driven from the campus because it lacked scientific
credentials.

2. It is worth bearing in mind that mathematics and physics are the same
throughout the But since that criterion has itself lost its own credentials, Mr.
Marsden wonders why entire universe, discoverable in principle by aliens
(if such there be) no matter what religion cannot reclaim its place on the
campus. He is right to raise such questions.

their social class, political predilections, gender (if they have genders!), or
peccadilloes.

[Diggins 1994]

I mention this to ward off the recent nonsense you may have heard
emanating from some It is not "scientism" to concede the objectivity and
precision of good science, any schools of thought—I speak loosely—in the
sociology of science. It is dismaying to read more than it is history worship
to concede that Napoleon did once rule in France and such a wise thinker as
John Patrick Diggins falling under its spell: the Holocaust actually
happened. Those who fear the facts will forever try to discredit the fact-
finders.

But, as Mr. Marsden notes, in the past it was assumed that science would be
the arbitrator of such disputes, whereas today science is dismissed as simply
another way 496 REDESIGNING MORALITY

Can Ethics Be Naturalized? 497

this—that there is not time, previous to action, for calculating and weighing
trated, not unwisely, on spelling out what that ideal theory is. The
theoretical the effects of any line of conduct on the general happiness." His
reaction was fruits of deliberate oversimplification through idealization are
not to be quite fierce:

denied, in philosophy or in any scientific discipline. Reality in all its messy
particularity is too complicated to theorize about, taken straight. The issue
is, Men really ought to leave off talking a kind of nonsense on this subject,
rather (since every idealization is a strategic choice), which idealizations
which they would neither talk nor listen to on other matters of practical
might really shed some light on the nature of morality, and which will just

concernment. Nobody argues that the art of navigation is not founded on
land us with diverting fairy tales.

astronomy because sailors cannot wait to calculate the Nautical Almanac.

It is easy to forget just how impractical ethical theories actually are, but we
Being rational creatures, they go to sea with it ready calculated; and all can
make the truth vivid by reflecting on what is implicit in Mill's use of a
rational creatures go out upon the sea of life with their minds made up on
metaphor drawn from the technology of his own day. The Nautical
Almanac the common questions of right and wrong, as well as on many of
the far is an ephemeris of sorts, a book of tables, calculated and published
annually, more difficult questions of wise and foolish. And this, as long as
foresight from which one can easily and swiftly derive the exact position in
the skies of is a human quality, it is to be presumed they will continue to do.
[Mill the sun, the moon, the planets, and the major stars for each second of
the 1861, p. 31.]

forthcoming year. The precision and certainty of this annual generator of
expectations was, and still is, an inspiring instance of the powers of human
This haughty retort has found favor with many—perhaps most—ethical
foresight, properly disciplined by a scientific system and directed upon a
theorists, but in fact it papers over a crack that has been gradually widening
sufficiently orderly topic. Armed with the fruits of such a system of thought,
under an onslaught of critical attention. The objectors were under the
curious the rational sailor can indeed venture forth confident of his ability
to make misapprehension that a system of ethical thinking was supposed to
work, and properly informed real-time decisions about navigation. The
practical noted that Mill's system was highly impractical—at best. This was
no methods devised by the astronomers actually work.

objection, Mill insisted: utilitarianism is supposed to be practical, but not
that Do the utilitarians have a similar product to offer to the general public?

practical. Its true role is as a background justifier of the foreground habits
of Mill seems at first to be saying so. Today we are inured to the inflated
claims thought of real moral reasoners. This background role for ethical
theory ( and made on behalf of dozens of high-tech systems—of cost-

benefit analysis, not only utilitarians have sought it) has proven, however,
to be ill-defined computer-based expert systems, etc.—and from today's
perspective we might and unstable. Just how practical is a system of ethical
thinking supposed to suppose Mill to be engaging in an inspired bit of
advertising: suggesting that be? What is an ethical theory for? Tacit
differences of opinion about this utilitarianism can provide the moral agent
with a foolproof Decisionmaking issue, and even a measure of false
consciousness among the protagonists, Aid. ("We have done the difficult
calculations for you! All you need do is have added to the inconclusiveness
of the subsequent debate.

just fill in the blanks in the simple formulae provided.") For the most part,
philosophers have been content to ignore the practical Jeremy Bentham, the
founder of utilitarianism, certainly aspired to just problems of real-time
decision-making, regarding the brute fact that we are such a "felicific
calculus," complete with mnemonic jingles, just like the all finite and
forgetful, and have to rush to judgment, as a real but irrelevant systems of
practical celestial navigation that every sea captain memorized.

element of friction in the machinery whose blueprint they are describing. It
is as if there might be two disciplines—ethics proper, which undertakes the
task Intense, long certain, speedy, fruitful, pure—

of calculating the principles determining what the ideal agent ought to do
Such marks in pleasures and in pains endure.

under all circumstances—and then the less interesting, "merely practical"

Such pleasures seek if private be thy end: If it discipline of Moral First Aid,
or What to Do Until the Doctor of Philosophy be public, wide let them
extend.

Arrives, which tells, in rough and ready terms, how to make "online"

[Bentham 1789, ch. IV.]

decisions under time pressure.

In practice, philosophers acknowledge, we overlook important consid-
Bentham was a cheerfully greedy reductionist—the B. F. Skinner of his
erations—considerations that we really shouldn't overlook—and we bias
our day. you might say—and this myth of practicality has been part of the
thinking in a hundred idiosyncratic—and morally indefensible—ways; but
in rhetoric of utilitarianism from the beginning. But in Mill we see already
the principle, what we ought to do is what the ideal theory (one ideal theory
or beginning of the retreat up the ivory tower to ideality, to what is
calculable another) says we ought to do. Philosophers have then concen-

'in principle" but not in practice.

498 REDESIGNING MORALITY

Can Ethics Be Naturalized? 499

Mill's idea, for instance, was that the best of the homilies and rules of
thumb of minimize (but not definitively) the problem of misevaluating
anticipated moves. Is everyday morality—the formulae people actually
considered in the hectic course of the anticipated capture a strongly positive
future to be aimed at, or the beginning of their deliberations— had received
(or would receive in principle) official a brilliant sacrifice for your
opponent? A principle of quiescence will help to resolve endorsement from
the full, laborious, systematic utilitarian method. The faith placed that issue:
always look a few moves beyond any flurry of exchanges to see what in
these formulae by the average rational agent, based as it was on many
lifetimes of the board looks like when it quiets down. But in real life, there
is no counterpart experience accumulated in cultural memory, could be
justified ("in principle") by principle that deserves reliance. Three Mile
Island has been followed by more than being formally derived from the
theory. But no such derivation has ever been a decade of consolidation and
quiescence (it happened in 1980), but we still have achieved.3

no idea whether it is to be counted among the good things that have
happened or The reason is not hard to see: it is unlikely in the extreme that
there could be a the bad, all things considered.

feasible algorithm for the sort of global cost-benefit analysis that
utilitarianism (or The suspicion that there is no stable and persuasive
resolution to such impasses any other "consequentialist" theory) requires.
Why? Because of what we might call has long lain beneath the troubled
surface of criticism to conse-quentialism, which the Three Mile Island
Effect. Was the meltdown at the nuclear plant at Three Mile looks to many
skeptics like a thinly veiled version of the vacuous stock-market advice

"Buy low and sell high"—a great idea in principle, but systematically
useless as Island a good thing to have happened or a bad thing? If, in
planning some course of advice to follow.5

action, you encountered the meltdown as a sequel of probability p, what
should you So not only have utilitarians never made an actual practice of
determining their assign to it as a weight? Is it a negative outcome that you
should strive to avoid, or a specific moral choices by calculating the
expected utilities of (all) the alternatives positive outcome to be carefully
fostered?4 We can't yet say, and it is not clear that (there not being time, as
our original objector noted), but they have never achieved any particular
long run would give us the answer. (Notice that this is not a problem stable
"off-line" derivations of partial results—"landmarks and direction posts," as
of insufficiently precise measurement; we can't even determine the sign,
positive or Mill puts it—to be exploited on the fly by those who must cope
with "matters of negative, of the value to assign to the outcome.)

practical concernment."

Compare the problem facing us here with the problems confronting the
designers What, then, of the utilitarians' chief rivals, the various sorts of
Kantians? Their of computer chess programs. One might suppose that the
way to respond to the rhetoric has likewise paid tribute to practicality—
largely via their indictments of problem of real-time pressure for ethical
decision-making techniques is the way the impracticality of the
utilitarians.6 What, though, do the one responds to time pressure in chess:
heuristic search-pruning techniques. But there is no checkmate in life, no
point at which we get a definitive result, positive or negative, from which
we can calculate, by retrograde analysis, the actual values of the alternatives

that lay along the path taken. How deep should one look before settling on
5.

Judith Jarvis Thomson has objected (in a commentary on "The Moral First
Aid a weight for a position? In chess, what looks positive from ply 5 may
look disastrous Manual" in Ann Arbor, November 8, 1986) that neither
"Buy low and sell high" nor its from ply 7. There are ways of tuning one's
heuristic search procedures to consequentialist counterpart, "Do more good
than harm" is strictly vacuous; both presuppose something about ultimate
goals, since the former would be bad advice to one who sought to lose
money, and the latter would not appeal to the ultimate interests of all
morally minded folk. I agree. The latter competes, for instance, with the
advice the Pirate King gives to Frederick, the self-styled "slave of duty" in
Pirates of Penzance: 3. Probably the closest anybody has come to a "result"
in this field is Axelrod's ( 1984)

"Aye me lad, always do your duty—and chance the consequences!" Neither
slogan is derivation of Tit for Tat, but, as he himself points out, the rule's
provable virtues assume quite vacuous.

conditions that are only intermittently—and controversially—realized. In
particular, the 6.A Kantian who presses the charge of practical
imponderability against utilitarianism

"shadow of the future" must be "sufficiently great," a condition about which
reasonable with particular vigor and clarity is Onora O'Neill (1980 ). She
shows how two utilitarians, people might disagree indefinitely, it seems.

Garrett Hardin and Peter Singer, armed with the same information, arrive at
opposite 4. How could Three Mile Island have been a good thing? By being
the near-catastrophe counsels on the pressing moral dilemma of famine
relief: we should take drastic steps to that sounded the alarm that led us
away from paths that would encounter much worse prevent shortsighted
efforts to feed famine victims (Hardin), or we should take drastic
misadventures—Chemobyls, for instance. Surely many people were
fervently hoping for steps to provide food for today's famine victims
(Singer). For a more detailed consider-just such an event to happen, and

might well have taken steps to ensure it, had they been ation, see O'Neill
1986. An independent critic is Bernard Williams, who claims (1973, p.

in a position to act. The same moral reasoning that led Jane Fonda to create
the film The 137) that utilitarianism makes enormous demands on supposed
empirical information, China Syndrome (a fictional near-catastrophe at a
nuclear plant) might lead someone about peoples' preferences, and that
information is not only largely unavailable, but rather differently situated to
create Three Mile Island.

shrouded in conceptual difficulty; but that is seen in the light of a technical
or practical difficulty, and utilitari-500 REDESIGNING MORALITY

2. Judging the Competition 501

Kantians put in the place of the unworkable consequential calculations?

2. JUDGING THE COMPETITION

Maxim-following (often derided as rule worship) of one sort or another,
such as that invoked in one of Kant's (1785 ) formulations of the
Categorical Your Philosophy Department has been chosen to administer a
munificent Imperative: Act only on that maxim through which you can at
the same time bequest: a twelve-year fellowship to be awarded in open
competition to the will that it should become a universal law. Kantian
decision-making typically most promising graduate student in philosophy in
the country. You duly reveals rather different idealizations—departures
from reality in other announce the award and its conditions in the Journal of
Philosophy, and directions— doing all the work. For instance, unless some
deus ex machina then, to your dismay, you receive, by the deadline,
250,000 legal entries, is standing by, a handy master of ceremonies to
whisper suggestions in your complete with lengthy dossiers, samples of
written work, and testimonials.

ear, it is far from clear just how you are supposed to figure out how to limit
A quick calculation convinces you that living up to your obligation to the
scope of the "maxims" of your contemplated actions before putting them
evaluate all the material of all the candidates by the deadline for

announcing to the litmus test of the Categorical Imperative. There seems to
be an the award would not only prevent the department from performing its
inexhaustible supply of candidate maxims.

primary teaching mission, but— given the costs of administration and
hiring Certainly the quaint Benthamite hope of a fill-in-the-blanks decision
pro-additional qualified evaluators—bankrupt the award fund itself, so that
all cedure for ethical problems is as foreign to the spirit of modern Kantians
as it the labor of evaluation would be wasted; no one would gain.

is to sophisticated utilitarians. All philosophers can agree, it seems, that real
What to do? If only you had anticipated the demand, you could have moral
thinking takes insight and imagination, and is not to be achieved by
imposed tighter eligibility conditions, but it is too late for that: every one of
any mindless application of formulae. As Mill himself puts it (1871, p. 31),
the 250,000 candidates has, we will suppose, a right to equal consideration,
still in high dudgeon, "There is no difficulty in proving any ethical standard
and in agreeing to administer the competition you have undertaken the
whatever to work ill if we suppose universal idiocy conjoined with it." This
obligation to select the best candidate. (I don't mean to beg any questions
bit of rhetoric is somewhat at war with his earlier analogy, however, since
one with this formulation in terms of rights and obligations. If it makes a
differ-of the legitimate claims of the systems of practical navigation was
that just ence to you, recast the setting of the problem in terms of the overall
disutility about any idiot could master them.

of violating the conditions set forth in your announcement of the
competition.

I do not at all intend this to be a shocking indictment, just a reminder of My
point is that you would find yourself in a bind, whatever your ethical
something quite obvious: no remotely compelling system of ethics has ever
persuasion.) Before reading on, please spend a little time, as much as you
been made computationally tractable, even indirectly, for real-world moral
think it takes, to plot your own solution to the problem (no fantasies about
problems. So, even though there has been no dearth of utilitarian (and
technological fixes, please).

Kantian, and contractarian, etc.) arguments in favor of particular policies,
When I have put this problem to colleagues and students, I find that, after
institutions, practices, and acts, these have all been heavily hedged with a
brief exploratory period, they tend to home in on one version or another
ceteris paribus clauses and plausibility claims about their idealizing
assump-of a mixed strategy, such as:

tions. These hedges are designed to overcome the combinatorial explosion
of calculation that threatens if one actually attempts—as theory says one
must—to consider all things. And as arguments—not derivations—they
have (1) choose a small number of easily checked and not entirely unsymp-
all been controversial (which is not to say that none of them could be sound
tomatic criteria of excellence—such as Grade Point Average, in the last
analysis).

number of philosophy courses completed, weight of the dossier (

To get a better sense of the difficulties that contribute to actual moral
eliminating the too-light and the too-heavy)—and use this to make a
reasoning, let us give ourselves a smallish moral problem and see what we
first cut;

do with it. Though a few of its details are exotic, the problem I am setting
(2) conduct a lottery with the remaining candidates, cutting the pool
exemplifies a familiar structure.

down randomly to some manageably small number of finalists—say fifty or
a hundred—

(3) whose dossiers will be carefully screened by a committee, which will
anism appeals to a frame of mind in which technical difficulty, even
insuperable then vote on the winner.

technical difficulty, is preferable to moral unclarity, no doubt because it is
less alarm-ing. (That frame of mind is in fact deeply foolish— ) There is no
doubt that this procedure is very unlikely to find the best candidate. Odds
are, in fact, that more than a few of the losers, if given a day

^

502 REDESIGNING MORALITY

Judging the Competition 503

in court, could convince a jury that they were obviously superior to the a
vote is taken. After the meeting, (e) there are those who still think that
elected winner. But, you might want to retort, that's just tough; you did the
better cut rules could have been chosen, that the department could have best
you could. It is quite possible, of course, that you would lose the afforded
the time to evaluate two hundred finalists (or should have restricted lawsuit,
but you might still feel, rightly, that you could have arrived at no the
number to twenty), etc., but done is done. They have learned the better
decisions at the time.

important lesson of how to live with the suboptimal decision-making of
their My example is meant to illustrate, enlarged and in slow motion, the
colleagues, so, after a few minutes or hours of luxuriating in clever
hindsight, ubiquitous features of real-time decision-making. First, there is
the simple they drop it.

physical impossibility of "considering all things" in the allotted time. Note

"But should I drop it?" you ask yourself, just as you asked yourself the that
"all things" doesn't have to mean everything or even everybody in the same
question in the midst of the free-for-all when the chairman wouldn't world,
but just everything in 250,000 readily available dossiers. You have all call
on you. Your head was teeming at that moment (a) with reasons why you
the information you need "at your fingertips"; there need be no talk of
should insist on being heard, competing with reasons why you should go
conducting further investigations. Second, there is the ruthless and peremp-
along with your colleagues quietly, and all this was competing with your
tory use of some distinctly second-rate cut rules. No one thinks Grade Point
attempts to follow what others were saying, and so forth—more information
Average is a remotely foolproof indicator of promise, though it is probably
at your fingertips than you could handle, so (b) you swiftly, arbitrarily, and
somewhat superior to weight of dossier, and clearly superior to number of

unthinkingly blocked off some of it—running the risk of ignoring the most
letters in surname. There is something of a trade-off between ease of ap-
important considerations—and then (c) you gave up trying to control your
plication and reliability, and if no one can quickly think of any easily
applied thoughts; you relinquished meta-control and let your thoughts lead
wherever criteria that one can have some faith in, it would be better to
eliminate step they might for a while. After a bit, you somehow (d) resumed
control, (1) and proceed straight to the lottery for all candidates. Third, the
lottery attempted some ordering and improving of the materials spewed up
by the illustrates a partial abdication of control, giving up on a part of the
task and free-for-all, and made the decision to drop it—suffering (e) instant
pangs of letting something else—nature or chance—take over for a while,
yet still dubiety and toying with regret, but, because you are wise, you
shrugged these assuming responsibility for the result. (That is the scary
part.) Fourth, there is off as well.

the phase where you try to salvage something presentable from the output
of And how, precisely, did you go about dismissing that evanescent and un-
that wild process; having oversimplified your task, you count on a meta-
level articulated micro wonder ( "Should I have dropped it?" )? Here the
processes process of self-monitoring to correct or renormalize or improve
your final become invisible to the naked eye of introspection, but if we look
at product to some degree. Fifth, there is the endless vulnerability to
second-cognitive-science models of "decision-making" and "problem-
solving" within guessing and hindsight wisdom about what you should have
done—but done such swift, unconscious processes as perception and
language comis done. You let the result stand, and go on to other things.
Life is short.

prehension, we see further tempting analogues of our phases in the various
The decision process just described is an instance of the fundamental
models of heuristic search and problem-solving.7

pattern first explicitly analyzed by Herbert Simon (1957,1959 ), who named
As we have seen again and again in this book, time-pressured decision-it
"satisficing." Notice how the pattern repeats itself, rather like a fractal
making is like that all the way down. Satisficing extends even back behind

the curve, as we trace down through the subdecisions, the sub-subdecisions,
and fixed biological design of the decision-making agent, to the design
"deci-so forth until the process becomes invisible. At the department
meeting sions" that Mother Nature settled for when designing us and other
organisms.

called to consider how to deal with this dilemma, (a) everyone is bursting
There may be somewhat nonarbitrary dividing lines to be drawn between
with suggestions—more than can be sensibly discussed in the two hours
biological, psychological, and cultural manifestations of this structure, but
allotted, so (b) the chairman becomes somewhat peremptory, deciding not
to not only are the structures—and their powers and vulnerabilities—
basically recognize several members who might well, of course, have some
very good ideas, and then, (c) after a brief free-for-all "discussion" in which
—for all anyone can tell—timing, volume, and timbre may count for more
than 7. The suggestion of temporal ordering in the five phases is not
essential, of course.

The arbitrary pruning of randomly explored search trees, the triggering of
decision by content, (d) the chairman attempts to summarize by picking a
few highlights a partial and nonoptimal evaluation of results, and the
suppression of second-guessing that somehow strike him as the operative
points, and the strengths and need not follow the sequence in time I outline
in the initial example. The process at this weaknesses of these are debated
in a rather more orderly way, and then level What I have described in the
Multiple Drafts Model of human consciousness in Dennett 1991a.

504 REDESIGNING MORALITY

The Moral First Aid Manual 505

the same; the particular contents of "deliberation" are probably not locked
could come up with, given our limitations. The mistake that is sometimes
into any one level in the overall process but can migrate. Under suitable
prov-made is to suppose that there is or must be a single (best or highest)
ocation, for instance, one can dredge up some virtually subliminal consid-
perspective from which to assess ideal rationality. Does the ideally rational
eration and elevate it for self-conscious formulation and appreciation—it

agent have the all-too-human problem of not being able to remember
certain becomes an "intuition"—and then express it so that others can
consider it as crucial considerations when they would be most telling, most
effective in well. Moving in the other direction, a reason for action
perennially men-resolving a quandary? If we stipulate, as a theoretical
simplification, that our tioned and debated in committee can eventually "go
without saying"—at imagined ideal agent is immune to such disorders, then
we don't get to ask least out loud—but continue to shape the thinking, both
of the group and the the question of what the ideal way might be to cope
with them.

individuals, from some more subliminal base ( or bases ) of operations in
the Any such exercise presupposes that certain features—the
"limitations"—

process. As Donald Campbell (1975 ) and Richard Dawkins (1976, ch. 11)
are fixed, and other features are malleable; the latter are to be adjusted so as
have argued, cultural institutions can sometimes be interpreted as compen-
best to accommodate the former. But one can always change the perspective
sations or corrections of the "decisions" made by natural selection.

and ask about one of the presumably malleable features whether it is not, in
The fundamentality of satisficing—the fact that it is the basic structure of
fact, fixed in one position—a constraint to be accommodated. And one can
all real decision-making, moral, prudential, economic, or even evolution-
ask about each of the fixed features whether it is something one would want
ary—gives birth to a familiar and troubling slipperiness of claim that bedev-
to tamper with in any event; perhaps it is for the best as it is. Addressing
that ils theory in several quarters. To begin with, notice that merely
claiming that question requires one to consider still further ulterior features
as fixed, in this structure is basic is not necessarily saying that it is best, but
that order to assess the wisdom of the feature under review. There is no
conclusion is certainly invited—and inviting. We began this exploration,
Archimedean point here either; if we suppose the readers of the Moral First
remember, by looking at a moral problem and trying to solve it: the problem
Aid Manual are complete idiots, our task is impossible— whereas, if we of

designing a good (justified, defensible, sound) candidate-evaluation
suppose they are saints, our task is too easy to shed any light.

process. Suppose we decide that the system we designed is about as good as
This comes out graphically in the slippery assumptions about rationality in
it could be, given the constraints. A group of roughly rational agents— us—

theoretical discussions of the Prisoner's Dilemma; there is no problem if
you decide that this is the right way to design the process, and we have
reasons are entitled to assume that the players are saints; saints always
cooperate, for choosing the features we did.

after all. Nearsighted jerks always defect, so they are hopeless. What does
Given this genealogy, we might muster the chutzpah to declare that this is

"the ideally rational" player do? Perhaps, as some say, he sees the
rationality optimal design—the best of all possible designs. This apparent
arrogance in adopting the meta-strategy of turning himself into a less than
ideally might have been imputed to me as soon as I set the problem, for did
I not rational player—in order to cope with the less than ideally rational
players he propose to examine how anyone ought to make moral decisions
by exam-knows he is apt to face. But, then, in what sense is that new player
less than ining how we in fact make a particular moral decision? Who are
we to set the ideally rational? It is a mistake to suppose this instability can
be made to go pace? Well, who else should we trust? If we can't rely on our
own good away if we just think carefully enough about what ideal
rationality is. That is judgment, it seems we can't get started:

a truly Panglossian fallacy. ( See the further reflections along these lines in
Gibbard 1985 and Sturgeon 1985.)

Thus, what and how we do think is evidence for the principles of rationality,
what and how we ought to think. This itself is a methodological principle of
rationality; call it the Factunorm Principle. We are (implic-3. THE
MORAL FIRST AID MANUAL

itly) accepting the Factunorm Principle whenever we try to determine what
or how we ought to think. For we must, in that very attempt, think.

How, then, can we hope to regulate, or at least improve, our ethical
decision-And unless we can think that what and how we do think there is
correct—

making, if it is irremediably heuristic, time-pressured, and myopic?
Building and thus is evidence for what and how we ought to think—we
cannot determine what or how we ought to think. [Wertheimer 1974, pp.
110-11; on the parallel between what happens in the department meeting
and what see also Goodman 1965, p. 63]

happens in ourselves, we can see what the meta-problems are, and how they
might be dealt with. We need to have "alert," "wise" habits of thought—or,
in Optimality claims have a way of evaporating, however; it takes no chutz-
other words, colleagues who will regularly, if not infallibly, draw our

pah at all to make the modest admission that this was the best solution tve
attention in directions we will not regret in hindsight. There is no point 506
REDESIGNING MORALITY

The Moral First A id Manual 507

We cannot expect there to be a single stable solution to such a design
having more than one colleague if they are clones of each other, all wanting
problem, but, rather, a variety of uncertain and temporary equilibria, with
the to raise the same consideration, so we may suppose them to be
specialists, conversation-stoppers tending to accrete pearly layers of
supporting dogma each somewhat narrow-minded and preoccupied with
protecting a certain set which themselves cannot withstand extended
scrutiny but do actually serve of interests (Minsky 1985).

on occasion, blessedly, to deflect and terminate consideration. Here are
some Now, how shall we avert a cacophony of colleagues? We need some
promising examples:

conversation-stoppers. In addition to our timely and appropriate generators
of considerations, we need consideration-generator-squelchers. We need

"But that would do more harm than good."

some ploys that will arbitrarily terminate reflections and disquisitions by
our

"But that would be murder."

colleagues, and cut oflf debate independently of the specific content of

"But that would be to break a promise."

current debate. Why not just a magic word? Magic words work fine as

"But that would be to use someone merely as a means."

control-shifters in AI programs, but we're talking about controlling
intelligent

"But that would violate a person's right."

colleagues here, and they are not likely to be susceptible to magic words, as
if they were under posthypnotic suggestion. That is, good colleagues will be
Bentham once rudely dismissed the doctrine of "natural and impre-
reflective and rational, and open-minded within the limits imposed by their
scriptible rights" as "nonsense upon stilts," and we might now reply that
specialist narrow-mindedness. If the simplest mechanisms that compose us
perhaps he was right. Perhaps talk of rights is nonsense upon stilts, but good
are ballistic intentional systems, as I claimed in the previous chapter, our
nonsense—and good only because it is on stilts, only because it happens to
most sophisticated subsystems, like our actual colleagues, are indefinitely
have the "political" power to keep rising above the meta-reflections—not
guidable intentional systems. They need to be hit with something that will
indefinitely, but usually "high enough"—to reassert itself as a compelling—

appeal to their rationality while discouraging further reflection.

that is, conversation-stopping—"first principle."

It will not do at all for these people to be endlessly philosophizing, It might
seem then that "rule worship" of a certain kind is a good thing, at endlessly
calling us back to first principles and demanding a justification for least for

agents designed like us. It is good not because there is a certain rule, these
apparently (and actually) quite arbitrary principles. What could pos-or set of
rules, which is provably the best, or which always yields the right sibly
protect an arbitrary and somewhat second-rate conversation-stopper answer,
but because having rules works—somewhat—and not having rules from
such relentless scrutiny? A meta-policy that forbids discussion and doesn't
work at all.

reconsideration of the conversation-stoppers? But, our colleagues would
But this cannot be all there is to it—unless we really mean "worship"—

want to ask, is that a wise policy? Can it be justified? It will not always
yield i.e., a-rational allegiance, because just having rules, or endorsing or
accept-the best results, surely, and ... and so forth.

ing rules, is no design solution at all. Having the rules, having all the This is
a matter of delicate balance, with pitfalls on both sides. On one information,
and even having good intentions do not suffice, by themselves, side, we
must avoid the error of thinking that the solution is more rationality, to
guarantee the right action; the agent must find all the right stuff and use it,
more rules, more justifications, for there is no end to that demand. Any
even in the face of contrary rational challenges designed to penetrate his
policy may be questioned, so, unless we provide for some brute and a-
convictions.

rational termination of the issue, we will design a decision process that
Having, and recognizing the force of, rules is not enough, and sometimes
spirals fruitlessly to infinity. On the other side, no mere brute fact about the
the agent is better off with less. Douglas Hofstadter draws attention to a
way we are built is—or should be—entirely beyond the reach of being
phenomenon he calls "reverberant doubt," which is stipulated out of exis-
undone by further reflection.8

tence in most idealized theoretical discussions. In what Hofstadter calls

"Wolf's Dilemma," an "obvious" nondilemma is turned into a serious
dilemma by nothing but the passage of time and the possibility of
reverberant doubt.

8. Stephen White (1988) discusses Strawson's well-known attempt (1962)
to terminate the demand for a justification of "our reactive attitudes" in a
brute fact about our way of life about which "we have no choice." He shows
that this conversation-stopper cannot Imagine that twenty people are
selected from your high school gradua-resist a further demand for
justification (which White provides in an ingeniously indirect tion class,
you among them. You don't know which others have been way). See also
White 1991. For a complementary (and enlightening) approach to the
selected— All you know is that they are all connected to a central com-
practical problem of ethical decision-making, see Gert 1973.

508 REDESIGNING MORALITY

The Moral First Aid Manual 509

puter. Each of you is in a little cubicle, seated on a chair and facing one or
her reflections is yet another dubiously fruitful idealization. And, more
button on an otherwise blank wall. You are given ten minutes to decide
important, it suggests that what Bernard Williams ( 1985, p. 101) calls the
whether or not to push your button. At the end of that time, a light will go
ideal of "transparency" of a society—"the working of its ethical institutions
on for ten seconds, and while it is on, you may either push or refrain from
should not depend on members of the community misunderstanding how
pushing. All the responses will then go to the central computer, and one
they work"—is an ideal that may be politically inaccessible to us. Recoil as
minute later, they will result in consequences. Fortunately, the conse-we
may from elitist mythmaking, and such systematically disingenuous doc-
quences can only be good. If you pushed your button, you will get $100,
trines as the view Williams (p. 108) calls "Government House utilitarian-no
strings attached.... If nobody pushed their button, then everybody will ism,"
we may find—this is an open empirical possibility after all—that we get $
1,000. But if there was even a single button-pusher, the refrainers will will
be extremely lucky to find any rational and transparent route from who get
nothing at all. [Hofstadter 1985, pp. 752-53]

we are now to who we would like to be. The landscape is rugged, and it
may not be possible to get to the highest peaks from where we find

ourselves Obviously, you do not push the button, right? But what if just one
person today.

were a little bit overcautious or dubious, and began wondering whether this
Rethinking the practical design of a moral agent, via the process of writ-
was obvious after all? Everyone should allow that this is an outside chance,
ing various versions of the Moral First Aid Manual, might nevertheless and
everyone should recognize that everyone should allow this. As Hof-allow
us to make sense of some of the phenomena traditional ethical theories
stadter notes (p. 753 ), it is a situation "in which the tiniest flicker of a doubt
wave their hands about. For one thing, we might begin to understand our
has become amplified into the gravest avalanche of doubt.... And one of the
current moral position—by that I mean yours and mine, at this very
moment.

annoying things about it is that the brighter you are, the more quickly and
Here you are, devoting several hours to reading my book (and I am no
doubt clearly you see what there is to fear. A bunch of amiable slowpokes
might doing something similar). Shouldn't we both be out raising money for
Oxfam well be more likely to unanimously refrain and get the big payoff
than a or picketing the Pentagon or writing letters to our senators and bunch
of razor-sharp logicians who all think perversely recursively rever-
representatives about various matters? Did you consciously decide, on the
berantly."9

basis of calculations, that the time was ripe for a little sabbatical from real-
Faced with a world in which such predicaments are not unknown, we can
world engagement, a period "off line" for a little reading? Or was your
recognize the appeal of a little old-time religion, some unquestioning dog-
process of decision—if that is not too grand a name for it—much more a
matism that will render agents impervious to the subtle invasions of hyper-
matter of your not tampering with some current "default" principles that
rationality. Creating something rather like that dispositional state is indeed
virtually ensure that you will ignore all but the most galvanizing potential
one of the goals of the Moral First Aid Manual, which, while we imagine it
interruptions to your personal life, which, I am happy to say, includes to be

framed as advice to a rational, heeding audience, can also be viewed as
periods devoted to reading rather difficult books?

not having achieved its end unless it has the effect of changing the
"operating If so, is that itself a lamentable feature, or something we finite
beings system"—not merely the "data" (the contents of belief or
acceptance) of the could not conceivably do without? Consider a traditional
bench-test which agents it addresses. For it to succeed in such a special
task, it will have to most systems of ethics can pass with aplomb: solving
the problem of what address its target audiences with pinpoint accuracy.

you should do if you are walking along, minding your own business, and
you There might, then, be several different Moral First Aid Manuals, each
hear a cry for help from a drowning man. That is the easy problem, a
effective for a different type of audience. This opens up a disagreeable
conveniently delimited, already well-framed local decision. The hard prob-
prospect to philosophers, for two reasons. First, it suggests, contrary to their
lem is: how do we get there from here? How can we justifiably find a route
austere academic tastes, that there is reason to pay more attention to rhetoric
from our actual predicament to that relatively happy and straightforwardly
and other only partly or impurely rational means of persuasion; the ideally
decidable predicament? Our prior problem, it seems, is that every day, while
rational audience to whom the ethicist may presume to address his trying
desperately to mind our own business, we hear a thousand cries for help,
complete with volumes of information on how we might oblige. How on
Earth could anyone prioritize that cacophony? Not by any systematic 9.
Robert Axelrod has pointed out to me that what Hofstadter calls "Wolf's
Dilemma" is process of considering all things, weighing expected utilities,
and attempting formally identical to Jean-Jacques Rousseau's Parable of the
Stag Hunt, in the Discourse on the Origin and Foundations of Inequality
Among Men (1755). For further discusto maximize. Nor by any systematic
generation and testing of Kantian sion of anticipations and difficulties, see
Dennett 1988b.

maxims—there are too many to consider.

510 REDESIGNING MORALITY

Yet we do get there from here. Few of us are paralyzed by such indecision
for long stretches of times. By and large, we must solve this decision
problem by permitting an utterly "indefensible" set of defaults to shield our
attention from all but our current projects. Disruptions of those defaults can
only occur CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

by a process that is bound to be helter-skelter heuristics, with arbitrary and
unexamined conversation-stoppers bearing most of the weight.

The Future of an Idea

That arena of competition encourages escalations, of course. With our
strictly limited capacity for attention, the problem faced by others who want
us to consider their favorite consideration is essentially a problem of
advertising—of attracting the attention of the well-intentioned. This
competition between memes is the same problem whether we view it in the
wide-scale arena of politics or in the close-up arena of personal
deliberation. The role of the traditional formulae of ethical discussion as
directors of attention, or shapers of habits of moral imagination, as meta-
memes par excellence, is thus a subject deserving further scrutiny.

1. IN PRAISE OF BIODIVERSITY

God is in the details.

CHAPTER 17: Ethical decision-making, examined from the perspective of
Darwin's dangerous idea, holds out scant hope of our ever discovering a

—LUDWIG MIES VAN DER ROHE, 1959

formula or an algorithm for doing right. But that is not an occasion for
How long did it take Johann Sebastian Bach to create the St. Matthew
despair; we have the mind-tools we need to design and redesign ourselves,
Passion? An early version was performed in 1727 or 1729, but the version
ever searching for better solutions to the problems we create for ourselves
we listen to today dates from ten years later, and incorporates many revi-
and others.

sions. How long did it take to create Johann Sebastian Bach? He had the
benefit of forty-two years of living when the first version was heard, and
CHAPTER 18: We come to the end of this leg of our journey through
Design more than half a century when the later version was completed.
How long Space, and take stock of what we have discovered and consider
where we did it take to create the Christianity without which the St.
Matthew Passion might go from here.

would have been literally inconceivable by Bach or anyone else? Roughly
two millennia. How long did it take to create the social and cultural context
in which Christianity could be born? Somewhere between a hundred
millennia and three million years—depending on when we decide to date
the birth of human culture. And how long did it take to create Homo
sapiens?

Between three and four billion years, roughly the same length of time it
took to create daisies and snail darters, blue whales and spotted owls.
Billions of years of irreplaceable design work.

We correctly intuit a kinship between the finest productions of art and
science and the glories of the biosphere. William Paley was right about one
thing: our need to explain how it can be that the universe contains many
wonderful designed things. Darwin's dangerous idea is that they all exist as
fruits of a single tree, the Tree of Life, and the processes that have produced
each and every one of them are, at bottom, the same. The genius exhibited
by Mother Nature can be disassembled into many acts of micro-genius—

myopic or blind, purposeless but capable of the most minimal sort of
recognition of a good (a better) thing. The genius of Bach can likewise be
512 THE FUTURE OF AN IDEA

In Praise of Biodiversity 513

disassembled into many acts of micro-genius, tiny mechanical transitions
worse; otherwise, destroying that hard-won product of design is worse.
Why between brain states, generating and testing, discarding and revising,
and is it much worse to kill a condor than to kill a cow? (I take it that, no
matter testing again. Then, is Bach's brain like the proverbial monkeys at

the type-how bad you think it is to kill a cow, we agree that it is much
worse to kill a writers? No, because instead of generating a Vast number of
alternatives, condor—because the loss to our actual store of design would
be so much Bach's brain generated only a Vanishingly small subset of all
the possibilities.

greater if the condors went extinct.) Why is it worse to kill a cow than to
kill His genius can be measured, if you want to measure genius, in the
excellence a clam? Why is it worse to kill a redwood tree than to kill an
equal amount of his particular subset of generated candidates. How did he
come to be able (by mass) of algae? Why do we rush to make high-fidelity
copies of motion to speed so efficiently through Design Space, never even
considering the Vast pictures, musical recordings, scores, books? Leonardo
da Vinci's Last Supper neighboring regions of hopeless designs? (If you
want to explore that is sadly decaying on a wall in Milan, in spite of (and
sometimes because of) territory, just sit down at a piano and try, for half an
hour, to compose a good the efforts over the centuries to preserve it. Why
would it be just as bad—

new melody.) His brain was exquisitely designed as a heuristic program for
maybe worse—to destroy all the old photographs of what it looked like
thirty composing music, and the credit for that design must be shared; he
was lucky years ago as to destroy some portion of its "original" fabric
today?

in his genes ( he did come from a famously musical family ), and he was
lucky These questions don't have obvious and uncontroversial answers, so
the to be born in a cultural milieu that filled his brain with the existing
musical Design Space perspective certainly doesn't explain everything
about value, memes of the time. And no doubt he was lucky at many other
moments in his but at least it lets us see what happens when we try to unify
our sense of life to be the beneficiary of one serendipitous convergence or
another. Out of value in a single perspective. On the one hand, it helps to
explain our all this massive contingency came a unique cruise vehicle for
exploring a intuition that uniqueness or individuality is "intrinsically"
valuable. On the portion of Design Space that no other vehicle could
explore. No matter how other hand, it lets us confirm all the

incommensurabilities that people talk many centuries or millennia of
musical exploration lie ahead of us, we will about. Which is worth more, a
human life or the Mona Lisa? There are many never succeed in laying
down tracks that make much of a mark in the Vast who would give their
lives to save the painting from destruction, and many reaches of Design
Space. Bach is precious not because he had within his who would sacrifice
somebody else's life for it, if push came to shove. (Are brain a magic pearl
of genius-stuff, a skyhook, but because he was, or the guards in the Louvre
armed? What steps would they take if necessary?) Is contained, an utterly
idiosyncratic structure of cranes, made of cranes, made saving the spotted
owl worth the abridgment of opportunities in the of cranes, made of cranes.

thousands of human lives affected? (Once again, retrospective effects loom
Like Bach, the creation of the rest of the Tree of Life differs from the large:
if someone has invested his life chances in becoming a logger, and monkeys
at the typewriters in having explored only a Vanishing subset of the now we
take away the opportunity to be a logger, we devalue his investment Vast
possibilities. Efficiencies of exploration have been created again and
overnight, just as surely as—more surely, in fact, than—if we converted his
again, and they are the cranes that have sped up the lifting over the eons.
Our life savings into worthless junk bonds.)

technology now permits us to accelerate our explorations in every part of At
what "point" does a human life begin or end? The Darwinian perspec-
Design Space (not just gene-splicing, but computer-aided design of every
tive lets us see with unmistakable clarity why there is no hope at all of
imaginable thing, for instance, including this book, which I could never
have discovering a telltale mark, a saltation in life's processes, that
"counts." We written without word-processing and electronic mail), but we
will never need to draw lines; we need definitions of life and death for
many important escape our finitude—or, more precisely, our tether to
actuality. The Library moral purposes. The layers of pearly dogma that
build up in defense around of Babel is finite but Vast, and we will never
explore all its marvels, for at these fundamentally arbitrary attempts are
familiar, and in never-ending need every point we must build, crane-like, on
the bases we have constructed to of repair. We should abandon the fantasy
that either science or religion can date.

uncover some well-hidden fact that tells us exactly where to draw these
Alert to the omnipresent risk of greedy reductionism, we might consider
lines. There is no "natural" way to mark the birth of a human "soul," any
how much of what we value is explicable in terms of its designedness. A
more than there is a "natural" way to mark the birth of a species. And, little
intuition-pumping: which is worse, destroying somebody's project—

contrary to what many traditions insist, I think we all do share the intuition
even if it's a model of die Eiffel Tower made out of thousands of popsicle
that there are gradations of value in the ending of human lives. Most human
sticks—or destroying their supply of popsicle sticks? It all depends on the
embryos end in spontaneous abortion—fortunately, since these are mostly
goal of the project; if the person just enjoys designing and redesigning,
terata, hopeless monsters whose lives are all but impossible. Is this a terri-
building and rebuilding, then destroying the supply of popsicle sticks is 514
THE FUTURE OF AN IDEA

In Praise of Biodiversity 515

ble evil? Are the mothers whose bodies abort these embryos guilty of in-
Santayana was a Catholic atheist, if you can imagine such a thing.
According voluntary manslaughter? Of course not. Which is worse, taking
"heroic"

to Bertrand Russell (1945, p. 811), William James once denounced Santay-
measures to keep alive a severely deformed infant, or taking the equally
ana's ideas as "the perfection of rottenness," and one can see why some

"heroic" (if unsung) step of seeing to it that such an infant dies as quickly
people would be offended by his brand of aestheticism: a deep appreciation
and painlessly as possible? I do not suggest that Darwinian thinking gives
us for all the formulae, ceremonies, and trappings of his religious heritage,
but answers to such questions; I do suggest that Darwinian thinking helps
us see lacking the faith. Santayana's position was aptly caricatured: "There
is no why the traditional hope of solving these problems (finding a moral
algo-God and Mary is His Mother." But how many of us are caught in that
very rithm) is forlorn. We must cast off the myths that make these old-

fashioned dilemma, loving the heritage, firmly convinced of its value, yet
unable to solutions seem inevitable. We need to grow up, in other words.

sustain any conviction at all in its truth? We are faced with a difficult
choice.

Among the precious artifacts worth preserving are whole cultures them-
Because we value it, we are eager to preserve it in a rather precarious and
selves. There are still several thousand distinct languages spoken daily on

"denatured" state—in churches and cathedrals and synagogues, built to
house our planet, but the number is dropping fast (Diamond 1992, Hale et
al.

huge congregations of the devout, and now on the way to being cultural
1992). When a language goes extinct, this is the same kind of loss as the
museums. There is really not that much difference between the roles of the
extinction of a species, and when the culture that was carried by that
Beefeaters who stand picturesque guard at the Tower of London, and the
language dies, this is an even greater loss. But here, once again, we face
Cardinals who march in their magnificent costumes and meet to elect the
incommensurabilities and no easy answers.

next Pope. Both are keeping alive traditions, rituals, liturgies, symbols, that
I began this book with a song which I myself cherish, and hope will
otherwise would fade.

survive "forever." I hope my grandson learns it and passes it on to his But
hasn't there been a tremendous rebirth of fundamentalist faith in all
grandson, but at the same time I do not myself believe, and do not really
these creeds? Yes, unfortunately, there has been, and I think that there are
no want my grandson to believe, the doctrines that are so movingly
expressed in forces on this planet more dangerous to us all than the
fanaticisms of that song. They are too simple. They are, in a word, wrong—
just as wrong as fundamentalism, of all the species: Protestantism,
Catholicism, Judaism, Is-the ancient Greeks' doctrines about the gods and
goddesses on Mount lam, Hinduism, and Buddhism, as well as countless
smaller infections. Is Olympus. Do you believe, literally, in an

anthropomorphic God? If not, then there a conflict between science and
religion here? There most certainly is.

you must agree with me that the song is a beautiful, comforting falsehood.
Is Darwin's dangerous idea helps to create a condition in the memosphere
that simple song nevertheless a valuable meme? I certainly think it is. It is a
that in the long run threatens to be just as toxic to these memes as
civilization modest but beautiful part of our heritage, a treasure to be
preserved. But we in general has been toxic to the large wild mammals.
Save the Elephants!

must face the fact that, just as there were times when tigers would not have
Yes, of course, but not by all means. Not by forcing the people of Africa to
been viable, times are coming when they will no longer be viable, except in
live nineteenth-century lives, for instance. This is not an idle comparison.

zoos and other preserves, and the same is true of many of the treasures in
our The creation of the great wildlife preserves in Africa has often been
cultural heritage.

accompanied by the dislocation—and ultimate destruction—of human The
Welsh language is kept alive by artificial means, just the way condors
populations. (For a chilling vision of this side effect, see Colin Turnbull
1972

are. We cannot preserve all the features of the cultural world in which these
on the fate of the Ik.) Those who think that we should preserve the
elephants'

treasures flourished. We wouldn't want to. It took oppressive political and
pristine environment at all costs should contemplate the costs of returning
social systems, rife with many evils, to create the rich soil in which many of
the United States to the pristine conditions in which the buffaloes roam and
our greatest works of art could grow: slavery and despotism ("enlightened"

the deer and the antelope play. We must find an accommodation.

though these sometimes may have been), obscene differences in living I
love the King James Version of the Bible. My own spirit recoils from a
standards between the rich and the poor—and a huge amount of ignorance.

God Who is He or She in the same way my heart sinks when I see a lion
Ignorance is a necessary condition for many excellent things. The childish
pacing neurotically back and forth in a small zoo cage. I know, I know, the
joy of seeing what Santa Claus has brought for Christmas is a species of joy
lion is beautiful but dangerous; if you let the lion roam free, it would kill
me; that must soon be extinguished in each child by the loss of ignorance.
When safety demands that it be put in a cage. Safety demands that religions
be put that child grows up, she can transmit that joy to her own children, but
she in cages, too—when absolutely necessary. We just can't have forced
female must also recognize a time when it has outlived its value.

circumcision, and the second-class status of women in Roman Catholicism
The view I am expressing has clear ancestors. The philosopher George and
Mormonism, to say nothing of their status in Islam. The recent Supreme
516 THE FUTURE OF AN IDEA

In Praise of Biodiversity 517

Court ruling declaring unconstitutional the Florida law prohibiting the
sacrificing of animals in the rituals of the Santeria sect (an Afro-Caribbean
those who blaspheme against a religion ( complete with bounties or rewards
religion incorporating elements of Yoruba traditions and Roman Catholi-for
those who carry them out) is beyond the pale. It is not civilized, and it is
cism) is a borderline case, at least for many of us. Such rituals are offensive
owed no more respect in the name of religious freedom than any other to
many, but the protective mantle of religious tradition secures our toler-
incitement to cold-blooded murder.1

ance. We are wise to respect these traditions. It is, after all, just part of
Those of us who lead fulfilling, even exciting, lives should hardly be
respect for the biosphere.

shocked to see people in the disadvantaged world—and indeed in the
drabber Save the Baptists! Yes, of course, but not by all means. Not if it

means corners of our own world—turning to fanaticism of one brand or
another.

tolerating the deliberate misinforming of children about the natural world.

Would you settle docilely for a life of meaningless poverty, knowing what
According to a recent poll, 48 percent of the people in the United States you
know today about the world? The technology of the infosphere has today
believe that the book of Genesis is literally true. And 70 percent recently
made it conceivable for everybody on the globe to know roughly believe
that "creation science" should be taught in school alongside evo-what you
know (with a lot of distortion). Until we can provide an lution. Some recent
writers recommend a policy in which parents would be environment for all
people in which fanaticism doesn't make sense, we can able to "opt out" of
materials they didn't want their children taught. Should expect more and
more of it. But we don't have to accept it, and we don't have evolution be
taught in the schools? Should arithmetic be taught? Should to respect it.
Taking a few tips from Darwinian medicine (Williams and Nesse history?
Misinforming a child is a terrible offense.

1991), we can take steps to conserve what is valuable in every culture A
faith, like a species, must evolve or go extinct when the environment
without keeping alive (or virulent) all its weaknesses.

changes. It is not a gentle process in either case. We see in every Christian
We can appreciate the bellicosity of the Spartans without wanting to re-
subspecies the battle of memes—should women be ordained? should we go
introduce it; we can marvel at the systems of atrocities instituted by the
back to the Latin liturgy?—and the same can also be observed in the
varieties Mayans without for one moment regretting the extinction of those
practices.

of Judaism and Islam. We must have a similar mixture of respect and self-It
must be scholarship, not human game preserves—ethnic or religious states
protective caution about memes. This is already accepted practice, but we
under dictatorships—that saves superannuated cultural artifacts for
posterity.

tend to avert our attention from its implications. We preach freedom of
Attic Greek and Latin are no longer living languages, but scholarship has
religion, but only so far. If your religion advocates slavery, or mutilation of
preserved the art and literature of ancient Greece and Rome. Petrarch, in the
women, or infanticide, or puts a price on Salman Rushdie's head because he
fourteenth century, bragged about the volumes of Greek philosophy he had
in has insulted it, then your religion has a feature that cannot be respected.
It his personal library; he couldn't read them, because the knowledge of
ancient endangers us all.

Greek had all but disappeared from the world in which he lived, but he
knew It is nice to have grizzly bears and wolves living in the wild. They are
no their value, and strove to restore the knowl-edge that would unlock their
longer a menace; we can peacefully coexist, with a little wisdom. The same
secrets.

policy can be discerned in our political tolerance, in religious freedom. You
Long before there was science, or even philosophy, there were religions.

are free to preserve or create any religious creed you wish, so long as it
does They have served many purposes (it would be a mistake of greedy
reduc-not become a public menace. We're all on the Earth together, and we
have to tionism to look for a single purpose, a single summum bonum which
they learn some accommodation. The Hutterite memes are "clever" not to
include any memes about the virtue of destroying outsiders. If they did, we
would have to combat them. We tolerate the Hutterites because they harm
only themselves—though we may well insist that we have the right to
impose 1. Many, many Muslims agree, and we must not only listen to them,
but do what we can some further openness on their schooling of their own
children. Other to protect and support them, for they are bravely trying,
from the inside, to reshape the religious memes are not so benign. The
message is clear: those who will not tradition they cherish into something
better, something ethically defensible. That is—or, rather, ought to be—the
message of muliiculturalism, not the patronizing and subtly accommodate,
who will not temper, who insist on keeping only the purest racist
hypertolerance that "respects" vicious and ignorant doctrines when they are
pro-and wildest strain of their heritage alive, we will be obliged, reluctantly,

to pounded by officials of non-European states and religions. One might
start by spreading cage or disarm, and we will do our best to disable the
memes they fight for.

the word about For Rushdie ( Braziller, 1994), a collection of essays by
Arab and Muslim Slavery is beyond the pale. Child abuse is beyond the
pale. Discrimination is writers, many critical of Rushdie, but all denouncing
the unspeakably immoral "fatwa"

beyond the pale. The pronouncing of death sentences on death sentence
proclaimed by the Ayatollah. Rushdie (1994) has drawn our attention to the
162 Iranian intellectuals who, with great courage, have signed a declaration
in support of freedom of expression. Let us all distribute the danger by
joining hands with them.

518 THE FUTURE OF AN IDEA

In Praise of Biodiversity 519

have all directly or indirectly served). They have inspired many people to
lead lives that have added immeasurably to the wonders of our world, and

in the universe. There is much more to learn. There is certainly a treasury of
they have inspired many more people to lead lives that were, given their ill-
appreciated truths embedded in the endangered cultures of the modern
circumstances, more meaningful, less painful, than they otherwise could
world, designs that have accumulated details over eons of idiosyncratic
have been. Breughel's painting The Fall of Icarus shows a plowman and a
history, and we should take steps to record it, and study it, before it disap-
horse on a hillside in the foreground, a handsome sailing ship way in the
pears, for, like dinosaur genomes, once it is gone, it will be virtually impos-
background—and two almost unnoticeable white legs disappearing with a
sible to recover.

tiny splash into the sea. The painting inspired W. H. Auden to write one of
We should not expect this variety of respect to be satisfactory to those my
favorite poems.

who wholeheartedly embody the memes we honor with our attentive—but
not worshipful—scholarship. On the contrary, many of them will view any-
MUSEE DES BEAUX ARTS

thing other than enthusiastic conversion to their own views as a threat, even
an intolerable threat. We must not underestimate the suffering such con-
About suffering they were never wrong,

frontations cause. To watch, to have to participate in, the contraction or The
Old Masters: how well they understood

evaporation of beloved features of one's heritage is a pain only our species
Its human position; how it takes place

can experience, and surely few pains could be more terrible. But we have
no While someone else is eatirig or opening a window or just walking dully
reasonable alternative, and those whose visions dictate that they cannot
along; How, when the aged are reverently, passionately peacefully coexist
with the rest of us we will have to quarantine as best we waiting For the
miraculous birth, there always must be can, minimizing the pain and
damage, trying always to leave open a path or Children who did not
specially want it to happen skating On two that may come to seem
acceptable.

a pond at die edge of the wood: They never forgot

If you want to teach your children that they are the tools of God, you had
That even the dreadful martyrdom must run its course better not teach them
that they are God's rifles, or we will have to stand Anyhow in a corner,
some untidy spot

firmly opposed to you: your doctrine has no glory, no special rights, no
Where the dogs go on with their doggy life and the torturer's horse intrinsic
and inalienable merit. If you insist on teaching your children false-Scratches
its innocent behind on a tree.

hoods—that the Earth is flat, that "Man" is not a product of evolution by In
Breughel's Icarus, for instance: how everything turns away natural selection

—then you must expect, at the very least, that those of us Quite leisurely
from the disaster; the ploughman may Have heard who have freedom of
speech will feel free to describe your teachings as the the splash, die
forsaken cry, But for him it was not an important spreading of falsehoods,
and will attempt to demonstrate this to your children failure; the sun shone
As it had to on die white legs disappearing at our earliest opportunity. Our
future well-being—the well-being of all of us into the green Water; and the
expensive delicate ship that must on the planet—depends on the education
of our descendants.

have seen Something amazing, a boy falling out of the sky, Had What, then,
of all the glories of our religious traditions? They should somewhere to get
to and sailed calmly on.

certainly be preserved, as should the languages, the art, the costumes, the
rituals, the monuments. Zoos are now more and more being seen as second-
That is our world, and the suffering in it matters, if anything does. Reli-
class havens for endangered species, but at least they are havens, and what
they gions have brought the comfort of belonging and companionship to
many preserve is irreplaceable. The same is true of complex memes and
their who would otherwise have passed through this life all alone, without
glory or phenotypic expressions. Many a fine New England church, costly
to maintain, adventure. At their best, religions have drawn attention to love,
and made it is in danger of destruction. Shall we deconsecrate these
churches and turn them real for people who could not otherwise see it, and
ennobled the attitudes and into museums, or retrofit them for some other
use? The latter fate is at least to refreshed the spirits of the world-beset.
Another thing religions have be preferred to their destruction. Many
congregations face a cruel choice: their accomplished, without this being
thereby their raison d'etre, is that they have house of worship costs so much
to maintain in all its splendor that little of their kept Homo sapiens civilized
enough, for long enough, for us to have learned tithing is left over for the
poor. The Catholic Church has faced this problem for how to reflect more
systematically and accurately on our position centuries, and has maintained
a position that is, I think, defensible, but not obviously so: when it spends
its treasure to put gold plating on the candlesticks, instead of providing

more food and better shelter for the poor of the parish, it has a different
vision of what

520 THE FUTURE OF AN IDEA

Universal Acid: Handle with Care 521

makes life worth living. Our people, it says, benefit more from having a
place 2. UNIVERSAL ACID: HANDLE WITH CARE

of splendor in which to worship than from a little more food. Any atheist or
agnostic who finds this cost-benefit analysis ludicrous might pause to con-
There is no denying, at this point, that Darwin's idea is a universal solvent,
sider whether to support diverting all charitable and governmental support
capable of cutting right to the heart of everything in sight. The question is:
for museums, symphony orchestras, libraries, and scientific laboratories to
what does it leave behind? I have tried to show that once it passes through
efforts to provide more food and better living conditions for the least well
everything, we are left with stronger, sounder versions of our most
important off. A human life worth living is not something that can be
uncontroversially ideas. Some of the traditional details perish, and some of
these are losses to be measured, and that is its glory.

regretted, but good riddance to the rest of them. What remains is more than
And there's the rub. What will happen, one may well wonder, if religion is
enough to build on.

preserved in cultural zoos, in libraries, in concerts and demonstrations? It is
At every stage in the tumultuous controversies that have accompanied the
happening; the tourists flock to watch the Native American tribal dances,
and evolution of Darwin's dangerous idea, there has been a defiance born of
fear: for the onlookers it is folklore, a religious ceremony, certainly, to be
treated

"You'll never explain this\" And the challenge has been taken up: "Watch
with respect, but also an example of a meme complex on the verge of me!"
And in spite of—indeed, partly because of—the huge emotional extinction,
at least in its strong, ambulatory phase; it has become an invalid,

investments the opponents have made in winning their sides of the
argument, barely kept alive by its custodians. Does Darwin's dangerous idea
give us the picture has become clearer and clearer. We now have a much
better sense anything in exchange for the ideas it calls into question?

of what a Darwinian algorithm is than Darwin ever dreamt of. Intrepid In
chapter 3, I quoted the physicist Paul Davies proclaiming that the reverse
engineering has brought us to the point where we can confidently reflective
power of human minds can be "no trivial detail, no minor by-assess rival
claims about exactly what happened where on this planet billions product of
mindless purposeless forces," and suggested that being a by-of years ago.
The "miracles" of life and consciousness turn out to be even product of
mindless purposeless forces was no disqualification for better than we
imagined back when we were sure they were inexplicable.

importance. And I have argued that Darwin has shown us how, in fact, The
ideas expressed in diis book are just the beginning. This has been an
everything of importance is just such a product. Spinoza called his highest
introduction to Darwinian thinking, sacrificing details again and again to
being God or Nature (Deus sive Natura), expressing a sort of pantheism.

provide a better appreciation of the overall shape of Darwin's idea. But as
There have been many varieties of pantheism, but they usually lack a con-
Mies van der Rohe said, God is in the details. I urge caution alongside the
vincing explanation about just how God is distributed in the whole of
nature.

enthusiasm I hope I have kindled in you. I have learned from my own As
we saw in chapter 7, Darwin offers us one: it is in the distribution of
embarrassing experience how easy it is to concoct remarkably persuasive
Design throughout nature, creating, in the Tree of Life, an utterly unique
and Darwinian explanations that evaporate on closer inspection. The truly
dan-irreplaceable creation, an actual pattern in the immeasurable reaches of
gerous aspect of Darwin's idea is its seductiveness. Second-rate versions of
Design Space that could never be exactly duplicated in its many details.

the fundamental ideas continue to bedevil us, so we must keep a close
watch, What is design work? It is that wonderful wedding of chance and

necessity, correcting each other as we go. The only way of avoiding the
mistakes is to happening in a trillion places at once, at a trillion different
levels. And what learn from the mistakes we have already made.

miracle caused it? None. It just happened to happen, in the fullness of time.

A meme that occurs in many guises in the world's folklore is the tale of the
You could even say, in a way, that the Tree of Life created itself. Not in a
initially terrifying friend mistaken for an enemy. "Beauty and the Beast" is
one of miraculous, instantaneous whoosh, but slowly, slowly, over billions
of years.

the best-known species of this story. Balancing it is "The Wolf in Sheep's Is
this Tree of Life a God one could worship? Pray to? Fear? Probably not.

Clothing." Now, which meme do you want to use to express your judgment
of But it did make the ivy twine and the sky so blue, so perhaps the song I
love Darwinism? Is it truly a Wolf in Sheep's Clothing? Then reject it and
fight on, tells a truth after all. The Tree of Life is neither perfect nor infinite
in space ever more vigilant against the seductions of Darwin's idea, which is
truly or time, but it is actual, and if it is not Anselm's "Being greater than
which dangerous. Or does Darwin's idea turn out to be, in the end, just what
we need in nothing can be conceived," it is surely a being that is greater
than anything our attempt to preserve and explain the values we cherish? I
have completed my any of us will ever conceive of in detail worthy of its
detail. Is something case for the defense: the Beast is, in fact, a friend of
Beauty, and indeed quite sacred? Yes, say I with Nietzsche. I could not pray
to it, but I can stand in beautiful in its own right. You be the judge.

affirmation of its magnificence. This world is sacred.

Appendix

Tell Me Why

Traditional

The harmony line is usually sung by the higher voices an octave above the
Melody.)

OceanofPDF.com

Document Outline

Contents
Preface
PART 1 STARTING IN THE MIDDLE

CHAPTER ONE Tell Me Why
CHAPTER TWO An Idea Is Born
CHAPTER THREE Universal Acid
CHAPTER FOUR The Tree of Life
CHAPTER FIVE The Possible and the Actual
CHAPTER SIX Threads of Actuality in Design Space

PART II DARWINIAN THINKING IN BIOLOGY

CHAPTER SEVEN Priming Darwin's Pump
CHAPTER EIGHT Biology Is Engineering
CHAPTER NINE Searching for Quality
CHAPTER TEN Bully for Brontosaurus
CHAPTER ELEVEN Controversies Contained

PART III MIND, MEANING,MATHEMATICS, ANDMORALITY

CHAPTER TWELVE The Cranes of Culture
CHAPTER THIRTEEN Losing Our Minds to Darwin
CHAPTER FOURTEEN The Evolution of Meanings
CHAPTER FIFTEEN The Emperor's New Mind, and Other
Fables
CHAPTER SIXTEEN On the Origin of Morality
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN Redesigning Morality
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN The Future of an Idea

Appendix

OceanofPDF.com

